Title: Wireless communication empowers online scheduling of partially-observable transportation multi-robot systems in a smart factory

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.23967v1

Published Time: Thu, 26 Mar 2026 00:37:59 GMT

Number of Pages: 17

Markdown Content:
# SCIENCE CHINA 

# Information Sciences 

# . RESEARCH PAPER .Wireless communication empowers online scheduling of partially-observable transportation multi-robot systems in a smart factory 

Yaxin Liao 1, Qimei Cui 1* , Kwang-Cheng Chen 2, Xiong Li 1,Jinlian Chen 1, Xiyu Zhao 1, Xiaofeng Tao 1 & Ping Zhang 3

> 1

National Engineering Research Center of Mobile Network Technologies, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing 100876, China 

> 2

Department of Electrical Engineering, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL 33620 USA 

> 3

School of Information and Communication Engineering, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing 100876, China 

Abstract Achieving agile and reconfigurable production flows in smart factories depends on online multi-robot task assignment (MRTA), which requires online collision-free and congestion-free route scheduling of transportation multi-robot systems (T-MRS), e.g., collabo-rative automatic guided vehicles (AGVs). Due to the real-time operational requirements and dynamic interactions between T-MRS and production MRS, online scheduling under partial observability in dynamic factory environments remains a significant and under-explored challenge. This paper proposes a novel communication-enabled online scheduling framework that explicitly couples wireless machine-to-machine (M2M) networking with route scheduling, enabling AGVs to exchange intention information, e.g., planned routes, to overcome partial observations and assist complex computation of online scheduling. Specifically, we determine intelligent AGVs’ intention and sensor data as new M2M traffic and tailor the retransmission-free multi-link transmission networking to meet real-time operation demands. This scheduling-oriented networking is then integrated with a simulated annealing-based MRTA scheme and a congestion-aware A*-based route scheduling method. The integrated communication and scheduling scheme allows AGVs to dynamically adjust collision-free and congestion-free routes with reduced computational overhead. Numerical experiments shows the impacts from wireless communication on the performance of T-MRS and suggest that the proposed integrated communication and scheduling scheme significantly enhances scheduling efficiency compared to the local reasoning-based baseline, even under high AGV load conditions and limited channel resources. Moreover, the results reveal that the scheduling-oriented wireless M2M communication design fundamentally differs from human-to-human communications, implying new technological opportunities in a wireless networked smart factory. 

Keywords Online scheduling, partial observability, smart factories, transportation multi-robot systems (T-MRS), wireless communi-cation 

Citation Title for citation. Sci China Inf Sci, for review 

1 Introduction 

Smart factories, an important vertical application in 6G mobile communications, are powered by reconfigurable cyber-physical multi-robot systems (MRS) with integrated artificial intelligence, computing, control, and networking technologies [1]. To realize agile and reconfigurable production lines, smart factories rely on online multi-robot task assignment (MRTA) for production MRS [2]. Furthermore, transportation MRS (T-MRS), e.g., collaborative autonomous guided vehicles (AGV), requires collision-free and congestion-free online scheduling [1, 3], which is significantly under-explored in literature. According to the online order demands, the edge server performs real-time MRTA and dynamically assigns production tasks to production MRS and dynamic transportation tasks to transportation MRS, as depicted in Fig. 1. Therefore, to support agile and flexible production, T-MRS must accordingly execute route scheduling to ensure the on-time pickup and delivery of industrial materials for the production MRS. Due to the shared factory floor, collisions are possible when multiple AGVs simultaneously move to the same location. Moreover, congestion occurs when many AGVs traverse an intersection simultaneously in different directions. Given the latency and scalability bottlenecks of centralized control, each intelligent AGV must perform real-time actions in a distributed manner, but collectively avoid collisions and congestion. 

* Corresponding author (email: cuiqimei@bupt.edu.com)   

> arXiv:2603.23967v1 [cs.LG] 25 Mar 2026 Sci China Inf Sci 2AP
> Edge server
> ④
> ②

Without wireless networking Wireless networking enables intention information exchange to 

supplement partial observability for d ynamic route scheduling     

> Feasible transportation routes
> Infeasible t ransportation r oute sWireless communication links
> Actions taken by AGVs

Route 1 

Congestion 

Route 2 

Collision  

> ①
> ③
> Online order demand
> limited perception range r
> P

P Pick-up node D Delivery node Resupply node R        

> Material Multi-Product Task node-1
> Multiple production flow formation & transportation task demands
> Task node-2 Task node-3
> AGV ’s partial observation:
> location, others locations within r,
> others last actions within r

Information exchange via 

wireless communication    

> RPD
> PD
> PDPD
> PDPDD

Collision-Free & 

Congestion-Free Route s    

> With communication
> Figure 1 Online scheduling for MRS in a smart factory. The edge server performs MRTA to the production MRS and thus T-MRS. ( 1 ○→2○). Without wireless networking, multi-AGV operating in a distributed manner with partial observations lead to collisions and congestion. With wireless networking, AGVs collaboratively execute pick-up and delivery tasks on time by real-time adjusting routes ( 3 ○), which significantly relies on AI operational intention and sensor data exchange via wireless networking ( 4 ○).

However, online scheduling for T-MRS faces several challenges. AGVs operate in a distributed manner and can only observe nearby obstacles and other AGVs within their sensing radius due to limited onboard sensor capabilities [4]. They are unaware of distant congestion, the planned motion intentions, and task information of others. This partial observability leads to coordination inefficiencies in distributed AI operations. Moreover, the highly dynamic factory environments impose real-time decision demands, requiring AGVs to adjust their routes dynamically based on incomplete local observations. In addition, realistic constraints further complicate scheduling, especially the dynamic interactions between production MRS and T-MRS. The completion of a production task triggers the start of its corresponding transportation task, which in turn affects when the subsequent production task can begin. Wireless communication among mobile AGVs suggests a technological solution to the real-time coordination and scheduling challenges in dynamic and partially observable smart factory environments [5, 6]. By enabling AGVs to share locally partial observations and obtain globally fused information [7], communication enhances awareness of congestion and other AGVs’ intention, thereby effectively reducing the uncertainty and supplementing partial observability. This allows AGVs to make more informed scheduling decisions and better adapt to dynamic factory conditions. However, wireless machine-to-machine (M2M) communication differs fundamentally from the commonly used wireless human-to-human (H2H) communication. M2M communication is designed in response to the computational requirements of AI functionality by considering downstream tasks and data contents [8–10], while H2H communication focuses on communication-related metrics optimization, overlooking the effects of wireless communication on subsequent task decision [11]. Consequently, to support collision-free and congestion-free online scheduling, the design of wireless M2M network-ing should be oriented toward downstream scheduling tasks while considering its impact on the overall scheduling performance of the factory. By recognizing control and scheduling as computational goals, scheduling-oriented communication is a core issue within the integrated communication and computation (ICC) domain for 6G [12, 13]. There is a pressing need to systematically explore tailored wireless networking to meet the computational demands of online scheduling and AI functionalities. To the best of our knowledge, no prior study has addressed this in the context of multi-robot smart factories. 

1.1 Related work 

Regarding the online scheduling for MRS in smart factories, some researchers study on dynamic flow-shop scheduling for production MRS [2, 14, 15]. But they implicitly assumed that AGVs perfectly complete transportation tasks Sci China Inf Sci 3

and ignored the uncertainties of transportation in dynamic environment. Several works attempted to improve AGV scheduling. For example, [16] proposed a dynamic AGV scheduling model but neglected collision and congestion issues under partial observability. Heuristic methods [17] addressed coupled task assignment and path planning but lacked proactive congestion avoidance. Other works studied collision-free navigation via reinforcement learning [18], or congestion-aware multi-robot planning [19]. However, they overlooked the dynamic interaction between production MRS and T-MRS, which is critical in a smart factory. Although [20] analyzed such interactions; however, it still did not address collision-free and congestion-free scheduling for AGVs. Due to the neglect of wireless networking design, the above studies usually make assumptions to simplify factory scheduling, which is not applicable and practical for online scheduling in partially observable and dynamic multi-robot smart factories. Some studies explored wireless resource management for indoor robots [21,22], but primarily focused on optimizing communication performance alone, overlooking the MRS scheduling demands of the overall factory. Similarly, [23] solely studied improving channel access rate by the topology control and channel allocation for the T-MRS. [24] employed communication-based token exchange to coordinate T-MRS, but assumed ideal, error-free links and lacked explicit wireless networking design. Therefore, these works overlooked the scheduling demands of MRS and treated communication as an independent layer. In summary, prior studies either (i) idealized the transport system and ignored collisions and congestion, (ii) considered AGV route scheduling but without heterogeneous production–transportation MRS interactions, or (iii) optimized wireless networking in isolation from online scheduling. None of these lines of work provides a systematic framework that integrates scheduling-oriented wireless networking to handle the production–transportation coupling and partial observability of dynamic smart factories. 

1.2 Contributions 

Building upon the identified gaps, the main contributions are summarized as follows: 

• We propose a novel communication-enabled online scheduling framework for distributed T-MRS operating with online arrival tasks and dynamic interactions of heterogeneous MRS under partial observability. Unlike prior works that decouple communication from downstream tasks, our framework explicitly integrates wireless M2M networking into route scheduling by treating the AGV’s planned intention as critical M2M traffic. By exchanging such intention information, we effectively supplement the local partial observations and assist complex computation of online scheduling in a highly dynamic factory environment. 

• We systematically tailor the wireless M2M networking to meet the real-time operational demands of online scheduling. Specifically, we design a retransmission-free multi-link transmission scheme, which exploits frequency diversity to mitigate cyber collisions and errors. This scheduling-oriented networking is then integrated with a simulated annealing-based MRTA scheme and a modified A*-based route scheduling method, allowing AGVs to dynamically adjust collision-free and congestion-free routes with reduced computational overhead. 

• By introducing real-time multi-link wireless transmission networking to achieve online scheduling, this paper shows the impacts from wireless communication on the performance of T-MRS and reveals several key findings: 1) Wireless communication among collaborative AGVs significantly enhances scheduling efficiency compared to the local reasoning-based baseline, even under high AGV load conditions. 2) Tailored real-time multi-link transmission networking effectively mitigates partial observability and enhances scheduling efficiency even with limited channel resources. 3) The optimal solution in scheduling-oriented wireless M2M communication differs from the optimal solution in H2H communication, implying a fundamental difference and new technological opportunities in a wireless networked multi-robot smart factory. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II formulates the online scheduling problem of T-MRS in a smart factory. Section III provides the implementation of online scheduling. Section IV details the design of the wireless networking tailored to online scheduling. Simulation results and new findings are presented in Section V. Conclusions with future directions are provided in Section VI. The notations used in this paper are summarized in Table 1. 

2 System model 

2.1 Factory environment, definitions, and assumptions The smart factory environment: The smart factory transportation environment is characterized by an undi-rected graph, denoted as G = ( V, E ), where V is the set of all discrete locations in the factory and E is the set of edges representing traversable paths between these locations. As illustrated in Fig. 1, fixed-location production Sci China Inf Sci 4                                          

> Table 1 Main Notations
> Notation Definition Notation Definition
> KThe set of AGVs Rk,Pk
> Task routes, and navigation routes of AGV
> kC,S,DThe number of available channels, selected channels, and communication interval BDecision matrix of MRTA
> botk, ˜ otk,otk,stLocal partial observation, additional observation, enhanced fusion observation, and global state
> cWMakespan based on local observations
> xm+,xm−,
> dtm+,dtm−,
> tddl m,μλm
> Task nodes for pick-up and delivery, quantity of production at task nodes, task’s due time, task’s priority
> Mtthe number of new tasks at time t
> dAT k,e Reach time of AGV kat task node bARoute decision matrix
> dW T k,e waiting time of AGV kat task node dP T k,e preparation time at task node

robots are deployed in columns by type and are located at the center of the grid cell. Each AGV in the T-MRS, denoted as k ∈ K = {1, 2, . . . K }, collaboratively transports industrial materials on time for production MRS based on partial observations to support sequential production processing. All AGVs share a fixed sensor range r, defining the maximum observation distance for any AGV. Let L ⊆ V and U ⊆ V denote the sets of AGV-located nodes and resupply nodes, respectively. 

The definition of transportation tasks: Let M t represent the total number of new transportation tasks, which arise from changes in production demands and can be adjusted at each reconfiguration timestep t = t1, t 2, . . . . The value of M t is determined by the number of production lines λt and the number of corresponding tasks per production line ωt. Thus, M t = λt · ωt, t = t1, t 2, . . . . The new set of transportation tasks is denoted as X t = {x1, x 2, . . . , x M t }.Each task consists of a sequence of two goal nodes: a pickup node and a delivery node. The pickup node is the partially completed products from an upstream production robot. The delivery node is the location of a downstream production robot that will continue the production process. To execute a task, an AGV must first visit the pickup node and then the delivery node within the allotted time. Formally, each transportation task xm ∈ X t is characterized by a tuple ( xm+ , x m− , d m+ , d m− , t ddl m , μ m). The pickup task node is denoted by xm+ ∈ P , and the delivery task node by xm− ∈ S, where P, S ⊆ V . dm+ is the number of the partially completed products produced at pick-up node xm+ . dm− indicates the number of raw material demands at delivery node xm− . tddl m denotes the allotted time to accomplish task xm. μm represents the priority of transportation task xm within the same production flow, where downstream tasks must wait for the completion of upstream tasks with higher priority [20]. 

The definition of AGV characteristics: Each AGV is characterized by a tuple ( botk, l tk, d tk). botk denotes the local partial observation of AGV k at time slot t, which will be detailed later. ltk ∈ L is the location node of AGV 

k and the state of the AGV is defined by its current location ltk. Let Kltk denote the number of AGVs located at ltk

at time t, which should be less than the threshold κ∗ to avoid congestion. dtk denotes the remaining raw materials currently carried by the AGV k. Thus, AGV k needs to resupply raw materials at the node u ∈ U when dtk is less than the demand, dm− , of its assigned task. Assuming that the maximum payload of AGV is restricted by d∗

> k

. At each time slot t, AGV k selects an action batk (move ‘north’, ‘east’, ‘south’, ‘west’, or ‘stay’) to either move from its current vertex to an adjacent vertex or remain at the same vertex based on its partial observation. This action is also referred to as a “navigation step”. 

The definition of partial observability: Ideally, achieving collision-free and congestion-free scheduling re-quires each AGV to make decisions based on the full global state st. Crucially, this includes not only the real-time positions but also the future navigation intentions and dynamic task status of all other agents across the factory. However, due to limitations in sensor availability, quality, and perception range r, each AGV individually perceives only a subset of dynamic global state within its sensing range, denoted by botk. Formally, this partial observation is generated by an observation function F that maps the global state st and perception range r to the AGV’s local perception [17], botk = F(st, r ), ∀k ∈ K.Specifically, botk consists of the AGV’s own state and information about other nearby AGVs. To formalize “nearby,” we define the set of neighbors for AGV k at time slot t as all other AGVs within a sensing range r:

N tk (r) = 

n

j ∈ K \ { k} ltk − ltj 1 ⩽ r

o

, where ∥·∥ 1 denotes the Manhattan distance. Similarly, let V (r) ⊆ V

denote the set of nodes observable by AGV k within its sensing range r. Thus, the partial observation is a tu-ple containing its own location, the locations of its neighbors, and the last actions taken by those neighbors: 

botk ≜ {ltk, {ltj }j∈N tk (r), {at−1 

> j

}j∈N tk (r)}. Consequently, botk inherently omits any information about locations and agents Sci China Inf Sci 5

outside the AGV’s sensing range, formalizing the concept of partial observability. 

The definition of task assignment route: During each reconfiguration, new transportation tasks are assigned to AGVs. This assignment is formalized by a binary decision matrix B ∈ { 0, 1}K×M t

, where an element Bk,m = 1 indicates that AGV k undertakes the transportation task xm. The assignment determines the high-level task route for each AGV, denoted as Rk. This task route is an ordered sequence of Rk key physical locations that AGV must visit, formally expressed as Rk = [ rk(1) , r k(2) , · · · , r k(Rk)]. To formally link the global task index m to its corresponding positions in the local route, we define a mapping. For any task xm assigned to AGV k, let em+ and 

em− denote the indices of its pickup node xm+ and delivery node xm− within the route Rk, respectively. Thus 

Rk[em+ ] = xm+ and Rk[em− ] = xm− . The task sequence Rk is constructed from the pickup and delivery nodes of both uncompleted tasks and new assigned tasks, along with resupply nodes. 

The definition of navigation route: To execute the task sequence Rk, the AGV then plans route scheduling and generates a detailed navigation route Pk. This route is the ordered concatenation of the sub-paths that connect task nodes in the task route Rk. Each sub-path, from a starting location rk(e) to a destination rk(e + 1), is a sequence of Ie + 1 adjacent vertices, Pek = [ pek(0) , p ek(1) , . . . , p ek(Ie)]. Here, pek(0) = rk(e), pek(Ie) = rk(e + 1), and ( pek(i), p ek(i + 1)) ∈ E for all i = 0 , 1, . . . , I e − 1. Then, the entire navigation route of AGV k is Pk =

P0 

> k

◦P 1 

> k

◦ · · · ◦ P Rk −1 

> k

. At each time slot t, AGV takes a discrete navigation step batk from a vertex pek(i) to a linked adjacent vertex pek(i + 1) or remains at the current vertex. 

Constraints and assumptions: The common constraints and assumptions are summarized as follows. 1) The AGVs cannot pick up partially completed products until it is produced by the production robots [2]; 2) Each AGV can transport only one task at a time [25]; 3) Each task can only be transported by a single AGV [16]; 4) The loading and unloading time of the raw materials and partially completed products are included in the processing time of the task [20]; 5) AGVs can load and unload material from any of the four sides of the production robot’s grid with equal effect; 6) Task assignment for production MRS can be supported by the previous work [2], which is not the focus of this paper. 

2.2 Problem formulation of online scheduling 

Since a transportation task is considered complete when the AGV delivers the required quantity of materials for the production robot within the allotted time [24], we proceed to formulate the scheduling objective based on the completion times of all tasks. The completion time for a given task xm assigned to AGV k is its arrival time at the task’s delivery node, which is denoted by dAT k,e m− . The arrival time at any step e in a route, dAT k,e , is calculated recursively, expressed as dAT k,e = dAT k,e −1 + dW T k,e −1 + T (rk(e − 1) , r k(e)) , (1) where dW T k,e −1 is the waiting time incurred at the previous node and T (·) is the travel time along the sub-path 

Pe−1 

> k

, which depends on the route decision vector bAk. Here, bAk contains the sequence of navigation steps batk of AGV k over time. The waiting time of AGV k at a pickup node, indexed by em+ for task m, is determined by the product’s preparation time dP T m, denoted by dW T k,e m+ = max {0, dP T m − dAT k,e m+ }. For all delivery and resupply nodes, the waiting time is defined as zero. Crucially, dynamic interactions between production MRS and T-MRS exist due to the production-transportation task dependencies. AGV k cannot pick up the partially completed product at node xm+ until two conditions are met: the necessary input materials that are the output of an upstream task have been delivered, and 2) the production robot at that node has finished its prior work [26]. This dependency is captured by the preparation time of the partially completed product dP T m.To formalize this, for any task xm that is not the first in its production flow, we define its direct upstream task as mup , whose priority is denoted by μmup = μm − 1. The AGV responsible for this upstream delivery is denoted as 

k′, and the completion time of this delivery is dAT k′,e mup, − . Furthermore, let mprev be the task that was processed at the same production node as task xm. The production robot becomes available only after the product for this prior task is ready. This time is given by the preparation time of the previous task, dP T mprev . Thus, the preparation time dP T m is expressed as dP T m = max {dP T mprev , dAT k′,e mup, − } + tp,m , (2) where tp,m is the processing time of task xm. Furthermore, to constrain the completion time of individual tasks, we define the tardiness for each task, denoted by dT A m = max {0, dAT k,e m− − tddl m }.The makespan, defined as the latest completion time among all AGVs, effectively captures the overall scheduling performance in cyber-physical manufacturing systems [27], thus it is used as the objective to be minimized in this Sci China Inf Sci 6

study. The makespan for completing all reconfigured tasks under partial observability is then naturally expressed as cW = max  

> k∈K ,m ∈X t

{Bk,m · dAT k,e m− }, t = 1 , 2, . . . , T .Therefore, the optimization problem is formulated as min  

> B,bA

cW (3a) s.t. X

> k∈K

Bk,m = 1 , ∀m ∈ { 1, 2, . . . , M t}, t ∈ T (3b) 

Bk,m · dT A m ⩽ τm, ∀k ∈ K , ∀m ∈ { 1, 2, . . . , M t}, t ∈ T (3c) 

Bk,m · dtk ⩾ dm− , ∀k ∈ K , ∀m ∈ { 1, 2, . . . , M t}, t ∈ T (3d) 

Bk,m · (d∗ 

> k

− dtk) ⩾ dm+ , ∀k ∈ K , ∀m ∈ { 1, 2, . . . , M t}, t ∈ T (3e) 

Bk,m ∈ { 0, 1}, ∀k ∈ K , ∀m ∈ { 1, 2, . . . , M t}, t ∈ T (3f) 

Kltk ⩽ κ∗, ∀k̸ = k′ ∈ K , t ∈ T (3g) where bA = { bA1, bA2, . . . , bAK } represents the route decision matrix for all AGVs over time, where each route decision vector bAk is derived from its local partial observation botk under partial observability. Constraint (3b) ensures that each task is conducted by only one AGV. Constraint (3c) guarantees that each task is completed within its due time, with a permissible soft delay τm. Constraints (3d) and (3e) define the security payload and resupply conditions, respectively, for each AGV in practical manufacturing scenarios. Finally, constraint (3g) ensures congestion-free routes. 

3 Implementation for online scheduling of collision-free and congestion-free routes 

3.1 Computationally feasible formulation of the problem 

The multi-robot scheduling problem is verified as NP-hard [17, 28], making exhaustive search infeasible for real-time operations. However, in a multi-robot factory where rapid decision-making is prioritized under dynamic environments, obtaining suboptimal solutions almost real-time is more effective and practical. Therefore, to ensure the computational feasibility of online scheduling, we decompose the problem into two subproblems [29]: 1) a centralized MRTA problem to match transportation tasks to appropriate AGVs; and 2) a distributed multi-robot route scheduling planning (MRRSP) problem to schedule the route for each AGV. The logical framework of this decomposition and the interaction between the two subproblems are illustrated in Fig. 2. The MRTA solution determines the routing objectives for MRRSP, while MRRSP generates paths that realize and assess the feasibility of MRTA decisions. Reconfiguable multi-                                  

> robottaskassignment
> (MRTA)problem
> Multi-robotroute
> scheduleplanning
> (MRRSP)problem
> Construction
> routegoals
> ExtendedA*algorithm
> withspatio-temporal
> congestionmap
> Simulatedannealing
> basedonlocal
> neighborhoodsearch
> SolveSolve
> OnlineschedulingofTMRS
> Decomposition
> Taskassignmentroutesandnavigation
> routesofefficientscheduling
> Output
> Wireless
> communication
> Assist
> Assist
> SpeedupcomputationaltimeofNP-hardproblem
> Revisedroutes
> Figure 2 The decomposition of the online scheduling problem and the coupling between the MRTA and MRRSP algorithms.

However, the inherent partial observability of the global environment poses a significant challenge for multi-AGV coordination. Relying solely on its local observation botk, an individual AGV lacks the situational awareness required to negotiate collision-free and congestion-free routes in a dynamic, multi-agent environment. To overcome this limitation, this paper leverages wireless communication to enable multiple AGVs to exchange intention information and thus compensate partial observability. Sci China Inf Sci 7Downlink: Task routes , congestion map                

> AGV-1 navigation route of
> MRRSP
> Action
> Collision & congestion
> resolution
> Edge server
> Uplink :AGVs ’routes ,
> 111 current state
> Action
> Revised action
> and routes
> ...
> MRTA solution
> Output
> Output
> Congestion map update
> Output
> Downlink traffic
> Uplink traffic
> AGV-knavigation route of
> MRRSP
> Output
> Figure 3 The proposed communication-enabled online scheduling framework.

3.2 Communication-enabled dynamic scheduling 

This section presents the dynamic scheduling scheme under the proposed communication-enabled online scheduling framework in Fig. 3. The edge server centrally assigns MRTA solutions with a simulated annealing (SA) algorithm to AGVs and each AGV then executes MRRSP with the proposed modified A* algorithm in a distributed manner. During the execution process of AGVs, they exchange critical state and intention information via wireless commu-nication, e.g., AGV’s navigation path Ptk and current state ltk. With such communicated information, denoted as ˜otk, each AGV forms an enhanced observation, which serves as a rich approximation of the global state st, enabling each AGV to dynamically revise its actions for safer and more efficient navigation. The operation of two modules significantly relies on the specifically designed wireless network to exchange local observations to supplement partial observability and dynamically adjust routes. We elaborate on more details of the modular design in the following. 3.2.1 Simulated annealing for MRTA 

When dynamic production demands arrive, the edge server performs MRTA for both production MRS and T-MRS, respectively. Since MRTA for production MRS can be supported by the previous work in [2], this section focuses on MRTA for T-MRS, which determines the route goals for MRRSP. Due to the real-time computational demands of scheduling, heuristic search methods are practical for obtaining solutions within a short time [30]. Thus, we utilize an SA algorithm with large neighborhood search (LNS) to solve MRTA. LNS, a widely used local search method [25], improves solution quality by iteratively destroying and repairing parts of a task assignment solution 

B.Specifically, each iteration consists of two parts that are guided by the tasks’ priority, μm: first, selecting a neighborhood to destroy by removing some tasks from the current solution B. The selection is not purely random but is biased by their position in the production flow. Tasks with a higher μm corresponding to a lower precedence, are assigned a higher probability of being removed. Second, repairing it by reassigning the removed tasks to generate a new solution Bnew . To ensure that precedence constraints are always satisfied, the removed tasks are first sorted by their sequence index μm and then inserted sequentially. If the estimated completion time ˜W (Bnew ) of the new solution is less than the current solution ˜W (B), then Bnew is unconditionally accepted. Otherwise, the probability of acceptance of Bnew is p = exp( −( ˜W (Bnew )− ˜W (B))   

> Ttemp

). SA uses a temperature T temp to determine the probability of accepting a non-improving solution, updating T temp with α × T temp after each iteration. In this scheme, consistent with [25], we use the term “estimated” time to indicate the time calculated under the assumption that all AGVs follow their shortest paths on the factory that ignore the congestions and collisions between each other. As analyzed earlier, for a given task assignment solution B, each AGV k is assigned a task route Rk = [ rk(1) , r k(2) , ..., r k(Rk)]. The estimated completion time for this AGV, ˜ tk is calculated as the sum of shortest path travel times, starting from its initial position and executing all tasks in sequence. The estimated completion time ˜W (B) of the solution is defined as the maximum estimated completion time among all AGVs: ˜W (B) = max k∈K {˜tk}. After the central edge server conducts the search algorithm for MRTA, it transmits the corresponding task route Rk to each AGV k

via downlink wireless communication. 3.2.2 Congestion map-aware A* for MRRSP 

Based on the received task routes via wireless networking, each AGV executes distributed MRRSP to transport industrial materials for production robots. However, when multiple AGVs traverse the intersection segment simul-Sci China Inf Sci 8 

> Algorithm 1 MRTA strategy based on LNS-assisted SA

Input: Initial task assignment solution B, initial temperature T temp , termination temperature T temp ∗, and cooling factor α. Set the objective function (3a) to ˜W (B). 

Output: Best task routes solution ˆB;Initialize best solution ˆB ← B;

while T temp > T temp ∗ do 

Choose a neighborhood to destroy by removing some tasks from B;Repair a neighborhood by reassigning the removed tasks to generate a new solution Bnew ;Obtain the estimated completion time ; 

if ˜W (Bnew ) < ˜W (B) then 

Set B ← Bnew ;

else 

Set B ← Bnew with probability p;

p = exp 

 −( ˜W (Bnew )− ˜W (B))  

> Ttemp



;

end if if ˜W (B) < ˜W ( ˆB) then 

Set ˆB ← B,

end if 

Reduce temperate T temp ← α × T temp ;

end while return ˆB

taneously in different directions, congestion can lead to delays [19]. While the traditional A* algorithm is effective at finding the shortest spatial path [31], it often neglects the temporal dynamics of multi-AGV traffic, leading to congestion. Our proposed method addresses this by extending A* to a spatiotemporal domain, guided by a spatiotemporal congestion map, denoted as Mglobal .This map is generated and periodically updated by a central server, which predicts the number of AGVs occupying each node for future time slots, enabling AGVs to obtain an approximate, system-wide observation. Upon receiving this congestion map via the wireless downlink, each AGV dynamically adjusts its route to proactively avoid potential congestion by taking detours. To incorporate time-varying congestion, the extended A* algorithm searches over a node state space where each state n is a tuple ( v, t ), representing the arrival at a physical node v at time slot t. When an AGV k needs to plan a path from its current location ltk, the A* search is initiated with the start state nstart = ( ltk, t ). The algorithm then explores successor states n′ = ( v′, t ′) to find an optimal path by minimizing the total cost function ϕ(n′): 

ϕ(n′) = g(n′) + h(n′) + c(n′). Here, g(n′) is the actual cost, representing the travel time from the start state nstart 

to the current state n′. h(n′) is heuristic function that estimates the minimum remaining travel time derived from Manhattan distance. c(n′) is the accumulated congestion penalties, which is determined from the congestion map: 

θ(v′, t ′) = 

(

Pcongestion , if Mglobal (v′, t ′) ⩾ κ∗

0, otherwise . Here, Pcongestion is a congestion cost value, which ensures that the generated navigation route proactively bypasses high-density areas, thereby achieving a congestion-free path at the planning level. κ∗ is the node congestion threshold, which determines the maximum allowable AGV density at a node to prevent deadlocks. In this study, we set κ∗ = 3 based on the empirical analysis in [24], which indicates that the collision probability exceeds 90% when three or more AGVs occupy the same location, posing a severe risk to navigation safety. By minimizing this composite cost function, the modified A* algorithm balances path length and congestion cost, resulting in more efficient navigation. Upon reaching the goal rk(e), the reach time dAT (rk(e)) is computed and updated according to (1). If dAT (rk(e)) − tddl rk (e) ⩽ τe, the path is reconstructed by tracing back through the parent nodes. By introducing dynamic congestion map, this method enables AGVs to avoid congestion dynamically rather than following the shortest path, as shown in Algorithm 2. 

4 Wireless networking suggested by online scheduling 

This section focuses on wireless networking design to meet the requirements of online scheduling. Wireless network-ing will be developed on two aspects: a) determining the required information to supplement partial observability, and b) designing the wireless networking framework, radio resources, and transmission process tailored to schedul-Sci China Inf Sci 9 

> Algorithm 2 MRRSP design based on congestion map-aware A*

Input: Start location ltk, goal location rk(e), current time t, congestion map Mglobal , due time of goal node tddl rk (e),and soft delay of goal node τe

Output: Path from ltk to rk(e)Initialize open list, closed list Push start node nstart = ( ltk, t ) into open list with g(n) ← 0, dAT (n) ← t

while open list not empty do 

Pop n = ( v, t ) from open list 

if v == rk(e) then if rk(e) is a pickup node then Compute: P T (rk(e)) by (2) and dW T (rk(e)) ← max {0, dP T (rk(e)) − dAT (rk(e)) }

else 

Set waiting time dW T (rk(e)) ← 0

end if Compute: dAT (rk(e)) according to (1) 

if dAT (rk(e)) − tddl rk (e) ⩽ τe then return Reconstruct path 

else 

Continue 

end if end if 

Add n to closed list 

for each neighbor v′ of v do 

t′ ← t + 1, n′ ← (v′, t ′)

if n′ is invalid or in closed list then 

Continue 

end if 

Update h(n′) ← Manhattan Distance( v′, r k(e)), g(n′) ← g(n) + 1, and c(n′) ← c(n) + θ(n′)

Calculate total cost for n′: ϕ(n′) ← g(n′) + h(n′) + c(n′)

if neighbor node is not in open list or ϕ(n′) is smaller than the existing cost then 

Push neighbor node n′ to open list Update cost and parent of n′ to n in open list 

end if end for end while return No path found ing requirements. Finally, the uplink success probability and throughput for a finite number of AGVs under the proposed framework are derived, providing a theoretical basis for evaluating the overall online scheduling scheme. 

4.1 Effective communication traffic for online scheduling of T-MRS 

We define the following as the critical M2M traffic for our online scheduling framework. 

• Current state lk: An uplink packet transmitted by AGV k every Dl time slots with size Sl bytes, which conforms to a constant bit rate (CBR) pattern. It reflects the two-dimensional location of AGV at current time, which supports real-time scheduling adjustments. 

• Navigation route Pk: An uplink packet sent by AGV k every DP time slots, with size SP bytes, and forwarded to other AGVs via APs. This traffic conforms to a CBR pattern. It encodes the planned two-dimensional trajectory as a time-indexed sequence, which reflects the intention information of AGV. 

• Global spatiotemporal congestion map Mglobal : A downlink packet is generated and sent by the edge server with an interval of DM time slots with size SM bytes, conforming to a CBR pattern and containing predictive congestion nodes across the factory with timestamps. Constructed using received navigation routes, the congestion information guides AGVs along congestion-free paths. 

• Task routes Rk: A downlink packet of size SR bytes is sent when the edge server completes MRTA, producing variable bit rate downlink traffic due to randomly arriving tasks. Sci China Inf Sci 10 

4.2 Wireless networking framework, radio resources, and transmission process 

As depicted in Fig. 1, the network framework comprises three primary components: 1) The edge server is responsible for centralized scheduling and management. It controls all APs, providing global fused information based on the routes and local states of AGVs; 2) Each AP provides wireless connectivity to the AGVs within its communication range, facilitating the transmission of uplink and downlink traffic; 3) High-bandwidth, low-latency optical fiber links connect the APs to the edge server, ensuring that data is rapidly forwarded from the APs to the central server, forming a reliable backbone for the entire network. Aligned with the 3GPP physical layer specification [32], a resource element (RE) is defined as the transmission of one symbol over one subcarrier, representing the smallest unit on the time-frequency grid. Suppose that orthogonal frequency division multiple access (OFDMA) is used for the physical layer transmission. A set of frequency-adjacent REs is aggregated into a resource block (RB), which serves as the basic unit for resource allocation. Each time slot contains a fixed number of REs. We define a group of REs with a consistent shape and position on the time-frequency grid as a radio resource unit (RRU), and each RRU is mapped to a logical channel. Throughout the paper, the term “channel” refers to this “logical channel” for brevity. For simplicity, it is assumed that each RRU/ channel can accommodate one data packet per time slot for transmission, e.g., a route packet with SP bytes and a state packet with Sl bytes. Additionally, the available radio spectrum is assumed to support C orthogonal channels. 

Uplink real-time contention-based multi-link transmission: Since AGVs must adjust their navigation actions in real time based on communicated observations to avoid collisions and congestion, low-latency commu-nication is essential for timely and effective decision-making in a smart factory [33]. Retransmissions are often ineffective in highly dynamic environments [34]. Thus, a retransmission-free contention-based access protocol is employed to support online scheduling, which is akin to real-time ALOHA by grant-free access, no acknowledg-ment, and discarding retransmission [7]. Furthermore, to enhance transmission reliability, multi-link transmission is utilized, where the same packet is simultaneously transmitted on multiple RRUs/channels. If multiple AGVs select the same channels simultaneously, cyber collisions are inevitable. Therefore, a packet is successfully transmitted when at least one copy is sent without collision. It should be noted that our system design is inspired by the multi-link operation specified in Wi-Fi 7 [35, 36], which enables simultaneous data transmission across multiple frequency bands. Without loss of generality, we assume that error control is available so that we can focus on collisions caused by simultaneous packet transmissions over the same link. Therefore, we design the contention-based multi-link transmission mechanism without retransmission, which is tailored for AGV scheduling traffic, where timeliness outweighs absolute reliability. By leveraging multi-link redundancy to exploit frequency diversity, it effectively mitigates the vulnerability of single-link transmission against cyber collisions and errors. This makes it both effective and well-suited for MRS operations in smart factories. For an uplink data packet, AGV randomly selects S channels to transmit the same packet simultaneously to the AP, e.g., navigation route Pk and current state ltk. The AP receives and decodes the packet based on the selection combining strategy while abandoning all retransmission and acknowledgment processes. The successfully decoded data is then forwarded to the edge server for centralized processing. 

Downlink transmission process: During the downlink transmission process, the edge server transmits a global spatiotemporal congestion map Mglobal to AP. Then, AP broadcasts the current congestion map to AGVs. 

4.3 Uplink transmission performance analysis 

This subsection analyzes the uplink success probability for the contention-based retransmission-free multi-link trans-mission scheme from a networking perspective, which helps understand how the real-time multi-link transmission networking affects AGV scheduling. Note that when S RRUs or channels are selected to transmit a packet, a col-lision occurs if all these RRUs collide with other transmissions. For simplicity, each AP is assumed to provide full communication coverage across the entire factory area, thus eliminating the need to consider the handover process. Although Q APs are uniformly deployed, they are assumed to logically function as a single AP. All AGVs compete for a common set of C orthogonal channels. Consequently, the system behaves identically to a single-AP setup without spatial frequency reuse. Assume each AGV transmits one uplink packet on average every D time slots. To model this probabilistically, we treat the transmission behavior as a Bernoulli process, where each AGV independently attempts to transmit in each time slot with probability Pt. Thus, the expected number of transmissions over D slots is E(X) = D · Pt = 1, where X is the number of transmissions. We initially consider two AGVs, denoted by a and b. Let i be the number of colliding channels between them. AGV a can successfully transmit under two mutually exclusive conditions: 1) AGV b is idle (i.e., not transmitting), Sci China Inf Sci 11 0 20 40 60 80 100                    

> The number of AGVs (K)
> 0
> 0.05
> 0.1
> 0.15
> 0.2
> 0.25
> 0.3
> 0.35
> 0.4
> 0.45
> 0.5
> Throughput
> D=2
> D=5
> D=10
> D=25
> D=40
> D=60
> (a) 020 40 60 80 100 120 140
> The number of A GV s (K)
> 0
> 0.1
> 0.2
> 0.3
> 0.4
> 0.5
> 0.6
> 0.7
> 0.8
> 0.9
> 1
> Transmission probability
> S=1, C=3
> S=1, C=10
> S=1, C=60
> S=2, C=3
> S=2, C=10
> S=2, C=60
> S=3, C=3
> S=3, C=10
> S=3, C=60 (b) (c)
> Figure 4 Comparison of the performances of transmission probability and throughput under different numbers of AGVs. (a) Throughput vs. the number of AGVs for different D values when C=S= 1; (b) Transmission success probability vs. the number of AGVs for different selected number of channels S when D= 2; (c) Throughput vs. the number of AGVs for different selected number of channels S when D= 2.

which occurs with probability 1 − Pt. 2) AGV b attempts to transmit, but its transmission collides with only i

of the S channels selected by AGV a, which occurs with probability Pt

(C−iS )(CS ) . Thus, the probability of successful transmission without collisions is the sum of these two probabilities: Pt ·



(1 − Pt) + Pt

(C−iS )(CS )



. Based on this, it can be extended to more than two AGVs. Since there are K − 1 independent AGVs, the probability extends to: 

Pt ·



(1 − Pt) + Pt

(C−iS )(CS )

K−1

.When considering all subsets of channels, the Inclusion-Exclusion Principle is used to prevent over-counting of collision occurrences [37]. Therefore, summing over i from 1 to S yields: 

Psuccess =

> S

X

> i=1

(−1) i+1 

Si



· Pt ·

"

(1 − Pt) + Pt

 C−iS

 CS

#K−1

. (4) Then, the throughput of the transmission process is given by: 

η =

> S

X

> i=1

(−1) i+1 

Si



· K · Pt ·

"

(1 − Pt) + Pt

 C−iS

 CS

#K−1

. (5) Before moving to the performance evaluation of the designed overall online scheduling scheme, we proceed to analyze the derived expressions of formulas (4) and (5) for the probability of successful transmission and the corresponding throughput. The results in Fig. 4(a) indicate that for a system with high AGV density and limited communication resources ( C = 1 , S = 1), throughput can be improved by enlarging the communication interval, as this alleviates cyber congestion. The results in Figs. 4(b) and 4(c) further demonstrate that when the AGV-to-channel ratio is low, multi-link transmission significantly enhances reliability by offering redundancy across multiple channels, thereby mitigating single-link interference. However, as the number of AGVs increases, see Fig. 4(c), the advantages are gradually offset by increased channel contention. This follows from the binomial factor  C−iS

/ CS



in (5), which causes faster decay of transmission success probability with larger S. As a result, although multi-link is advantageous at moderate AGV-to-channel ratios, single-link eventually outperforms it. For C = 60 and D = 2, this crossover is observed at K = 72, as shown in Fig. 4(c). At an ultra-high number of AGVs, the system breaks down where both transmission success probability and throughput approach zero. The results indicate that while multi-link transmission is beneficial, under high AGV-to-channel ratios, the system should adopt fewer channels 

S or a larger communication interval D to enhance transmission reliability. These results provide a baseline for comparison with the results of scheduling-oriented communication for T-MRS. 

4.4 Integration of wireless networking and dynamic scheduling 

Based on the designed wireless networking, this subsection illustrates how communicated information mitigates the limitation of partial observability within the proposed online scheduling mechanism. The mechanism forms a closed loop of uplink reporting, centralized processing, downlink broadcast, distributed path execution and dynamic replanning. Sci China Inf Sci 12 

Uplink phase: Each AGV k transmits its current state ltk and navigation route Ptk to the associated AP via contention-based multi-link transmission at every D time slots. The AP then forwards the successfully received reports to the edge server. 

Edge server processing and downlink phase: Upon the arrival of new task demands, the edge server first executes the MRTA procedure using the Algorithm 1 to assign tasks and generate task routes Rtk for each AGV. Concurrently, the edge server constructs the global spatiotemporal congestion map Mtglobal from uplinked information. The updated congestion map and navigation route are then transmitted via downlink to the AGVs that successfully reported their information, enabling them to incorporate global networked information into their route planning. 

Distributed AGVs decision: Each AGV operates in a distributed path execution and dynamic replanning process. Each AGV observes nearby AGVs within its sensing range r and forms a local map Mtlocal,k . Upon receiving global map, the AGV merges Mtglobal with Mtlocal,k via an element-wise maximum operator. Subsequently, the AGV executes the MRRSP using the congestion map-aware A* algorithm (Algorithm 2). Specifically, strictly following the mechanism defined in Section 3.2.2, the algorithm incorporates the merged congestion information into its cost function. By assigning high penalty costs to nodes where the predicted occupancy exceeds the congestion threshold 

κ∗, the AGV proactively generates a navigation route that bypasses these high-traffic areas. With the generated route, AGV determines the planned action atk. Before executing the action, the AGV performs a real-time conflict detection by examining the received routes for overlapping future positions. Conflicts are then resolved through predefined right-of-way rules: an AGV with a lower priority needs to stay and wait until all higher-priority AGVs have cleared the conflict area. 1○ highest priority: the northbound AGV; 2○ second priority: the southbound AGV; 3○ third priority: the eastbound AGV; 4○ lowest priority: the westbound AGV. In the event of communication failure due to severe packet collisions or errors, the AGV reverts to a local reasoning mode. Specifically, if no new congestion map is available, each AGV only relies on local sensing within its sensing range r and forms a local map Mtlocal,k . The AGV then merges this with its most recently received global map 

Mt′

> global

, which retains the historical reservations of other AGVs, to perform MRRSP. Critically, the physical safety is guaranteed by the right-of-way rules: if another AGV is detected and the current AGV does not have right-of-way, it stays until the higher-priority AGV passes for collision resolution. In summary, each AGV first follows the planned full-path generated by congestion-aware A*. The priority-based right-of-way rules are triggered only when an imminent collision risk is detected. Only when these rules lead to a deviation, i.e., the actual action no longer follows the originally planned path, is Algorithm 2 invoked again to replan a new route. This design enables AGVs to adaptively adjust their navigation with real-time wireless communication, allowing proactive congestion avoidance and collision mitigation, which reduces unnecessary waiting and improves overall scheduling efficiency compared to purely local, perception-based navigation. 

4.5 Complexity analysis of distributed route scheduling 

As MRTA is centrally managed by the edge server, this subsection analyzes the computational complexity of distributed MRRSP, which is executed by each AGV under local resource constraints. In the communication-enabled scheduling scheme, the major local computational tasks of each AGV include 1) route scheduling based on the modified A* method with the received global congestion map, with computational complexity O(V log (V )), and 2) collision detection and resolution based on the global congestion map against neighboring AGVs N tk (r), with complexity O(|N tk (r)|). Therefore, the computational complexity of each AGV in the proposed communication-enabled scheduling scheme is O(V log (V ) + |N tk (r)|). In the traditional local reasoning-based scheme, the main local computational tasks of each AGV include 1) the generation of local congestion maps with computational complexity O(|Vk(r)|), 2) independent route planning with a modified A* method, whose computational complexity is O(V log (V )), and 3) pairwise collision detection and resolution with other AGVs due to the lack of shared states, whose computational complexity is O(|N tk (r)|2). Therefore, the computational complexity of the local reasoning-based scheme is O(|Vk(r)| + V log (V ) + |N tk (r)|2). The proposed scheme leverages wireless networking to share the global congestion map generated by the edge server. This eliminates the need for each AGV to compute and predict other AGVs’ intentions or routes in real-time and effectively reduces the local computational burden. Quantitatively, for a factory grid (e.g., 50 × 50), the dominant computation O(V log V ) executes in a few milliseconds on standard embedded processors (e.g., 100 MFLOPS). This negligible latency, compared to the typical 100–500 ms control cycle, guarantees online feasibility. Sci China Inf Sci 13 0 20 40 60 80 100    

> The number of AGVs, K
> 0500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500
> Makespan
> Uncontrolled scheduling Local reasoning-based scheduling Ideal communication-enabled dynamic scheduling Communication-enabled dynamic scheduling ( = 0.1) Communication-enabled dynamic scheduling ( = 0.3)
> Figure 5 The number of AGVs vs. makespan

5 Computational experiments 

This section first demonstrates the necessity of wireless networking in enabling online scheduling under partial observability, then evaluates the impact of key communication resource settings on the scheduling efficiency of T-MRS. Finally, it discusses the insights gained from the simulations. We implement our approach with Python 3.8 on a server configured with Intel ® Xeon ® Platinum 8369B CPU. The experiments are conducted in a 10 ×

10 grid with AGV numbers K ranging from 2 to 60 for typical scenarios, and extended up to 100 to evaluate the system performance under extreme loads. The task set includes 60 production lines, each consisting of 4 tasks, which delineate the locations of the AGV’s pickup and delivery nodes. The raw material demands and the processing time for each task are generated randomly following a uniform distribution U (5 , 10). This setting is chosen to verify the general applicability of the proposed scheme across diverse load conditions without assuming specific production patterns or avoiding introducing any specific bias. Each experiment is repeated five times with distinct seed sets for the environment and each AGV, and the results are averaged across these runs to ensure statistical reliability. The threshold κ∗ for free congestion is set as 3, which aligns with [24]. The maximum payload d∗, the perception range r of AGVs, and the cooling factor α are set as 20, 2, and 0.995, respectively. In the communication configuration, different types of data packets are transmitted with the same communication interval. While most prior communication-centric studies focus on optimizing wireless performance alone, our work integrates communication and scheduling, treating communication as a core driver to enhance scheduling efficiency. This fundamental difference in objective makes a direct comparison with methods optimized for traditional wireless performance metrics non-trivial. This paper aims to demonstrate the the impacts from wireless communication on the online scheduling of T-MRS. 

5.1 Ideal wireless networking supports online scheduling 

We first show the superiority of the proposed scheme for online scheduling under ideal communication conditions (infinite resources, no cyber collision, and no errors), see Fig. 5. To emulate dynamic production, task sets are recon-figured three times without prior knowledge to the AGVs. Three baselines are considered: two non-communication and one error-prone communication scheme: 1) An uncontrolled scheduling scheme that is used to expose the oc-currence of collisions and congestion in a smart factory. 2) A local reasoning-based scheme that relies solely on local partial observations and requires two additional time slots to stay for navigation safety. 3) A communication-enabled scheme without retransmissions, where random errors occur independently at each uplink link with probability σ.As depicted in Fig. 5, increasing the number of AGVs initially improves the production process by enabling more parallel production. However, beyond 10 AGVs, significant performance degradation occurs under the uncontrolled baseline. The whole trend is primarily due to physical collisions and congestion that introduce substantial delays and disrupt factory operations. Similarly, with the local reasoning-based scheme, the makespan grows rapidly beyond 10 AGVs, indicating that large-scale AGV deployment is unsustainable when relying only on local observations. In contrast, the proposed communication-enabled scheduling substantially improves scalability. Even when the number of AGVs exceeds 30, the makespan remains significantly lower, achieving a 54.42% efficiency gain compared to the local reasoning baseline. This gain is attributed to real-time updates of the global congestion map Mglobal 

and route exchange via wireless networking, which alleviate the effects of partial observability and enable AGVs to proactively adjust their navigation to avoid predicted congestion. It should be noted that the observed turning Sci China Inf Sci 14 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 Communication intervals D 2100 2150 2200 2250 2300 2350 Makespan 00.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3 0.35 0.4  

> Throughput
> Mean makespan of communication-enabled scheduling Mean makespan of local reasoning-based scheduling Wireless communication throughput
> Figure 6 Communication interval vs. makespan

point cannot be determined by a closed-form expression. Rather, it results from the coupled effects of wireless information exchange, AGV traffic density, task reconfiguration, and factory size. While the exact threshold is scenario-dependent, the fundamental trend is robust: system efficiency improves with moderate AGV density due to parallel production, but beyond a certain level, physical congestion leads to performance degradation. Furthermore, Fig. 5 illustrates the impact of communication errors. When random errors occur with σ = 0 .1 and 

σ = 0 .3, performance degradation is observed compared to the ideal communication case. However, the reduction is notably smaller than in the non-communication baselines. The rationale is that our scheduling scheme adopts the multi-link duplication, effectively mitigating single-link error and enhancing transmission reliability. These results consistently indicate that real-time wireless networking is indispensable for online scheduling under partial observability. Without communication, AGVs relying on local partial observations incur significant delays due to collisions and congestion, making factory operations prone to severe disruptions. 

5.2 Online scheduling with realistic wireless networking 

In a practical smart factory with limited radio resources, wireless networking is subject to cyber contention, leading to information loss. Since each AGV relies on received observations for proactive decision-making, such information loss reintroduces partial observability. Thus, we investigate how different wireless network configurations affect the overall factory performance. 

The effects of communication interval D: We first evaluate how the communication interval D impacts overall scheduling performance. A resource-constrained scenario is simulated with 60 AGVs sharing a single channel (C = S = 1), where cyber contention is most severe. This setting aims to further show the effectiveness and necessity of wireless networking in supporting scheduling performance even with limited resource. As shown in Fig. 6, the proposed communication-enabled scheme achieves a 17.27% scheduling efficiency gain over local reasoning-based scheduling when D is around 25. The optimal interval results from a tradeoff: for small 

D, frequent simultaneous transmissions increase the cyber contention probability, reducing the success rate of route reports Pk, as theoretically analyzed in (4) and illustrated in Fig. 4. This communication failure, as shown in Fig. 4, translates to the poor scheduling performance observed in the left region of Fig. 6, as AGVs fail to exchange critical route information. For large D, the outdated updates lead to ineffective decisions for AGV scheduling. Thus, the optimal interval D∗ emerges at the balance point where the rising cyber contention probability for small D intersects with the increasing staleness for large D. Notably, the optimal communication interval D∗ for scheduling in Fig. 6, differs from the interval setting aimed at maximizing communication throughput in Fig. 4. This distinction indicates that optimizing communication metrics alone in H2H communication does not guarantee optimal performance in M2M communication systems. Thus, an adaptively communication-computation co-design approach is necessary to meet downstream task demands and prioritize overall T-MRS performance. 

The effects of the number of selected channels S: We next investigate the impacts from the number of selected communication channels S in our proposed transmission scheme on the overall scheduling efficiency under varying numbers of AGVs. The experiments are conducted under fixed channel resources ( C = 60), communication interval ( D = 2), and varying numbers of AGVs ( K ∈ { 2, 5, 10 , 20 , 30 , 40 , 50 , 60 }). Fig. 7 shows the overall trend of makespan, which initially decreases and then increases as the number of AGVs grows, regardless of the number of selected channels. This trend is because while more AGVs enable greater production parallelism, they also increase the risk of channel contention, and thus physical congestion and collisions. Fig. 7 also demonstrates that an inflection point appears at K = 10 when the number of AGVs is 60, beyond which increasing the number of selected channels Sci China Inf Sci 15             

> Figure 7 Makespan Wvs. the number of selected channels Sand the number of AGVs K
> Figure 8 Makespan Wvs. the available number of channels Cand the number of AGVs K

leads to more channel contention, offsetting the benefits of parallel transmissions. This contention limits AGVs’ ability to receive complete updates of congestion map, thereby worsening partial observability and potentially affecting effective navigation decisions to avoid congestion in advance. Moreover, the optimal number of selected channels for scheduling deviates from that used to maximize communication throughput in Fig. 4, which suggests the differences between M2M and commonly used H2H communication. While M2M communication prioritizes overall scheduling efficiency in the factory, H2H communication typically aims at maximizing throughput. These results indicate that multi-link transmission increases transmission reliability and thus improves scheduling efficiency when the ratio of AGVs and available channels is low. As the ratio increases, reservation-based mech-anisms provide more effective exchange of route information, supplementing partial observability. Furthermore, it is observed that as the number of AGVs increases, the impact of the number of selected channels on T-MRS scheduling becomes increasingly significant, making adaptive communication strategies essential in larger systems. 

The effects of the number of available channels C: Finally, we analyze the impact of the number of available channels C on online scheduling using 72 parameter combinations across eight K values and nine C values, as shown in Fig. 8. The results show that increasing the number of available channels consistently enhances information exchange reliability, enabling more AGVs to obtain a reliable global congestion map. This mitigates the limits of partial observability, allowing AGVs to plan effective routes to avoid congestion in advance. However, a distinct trend emerges: due to the factory size and the number of parallel production lines, the advantages of adding more channel resources C eventually saturate. This finding reveals that co-design of communication and computation is essential, which considers the number of production lines, factory size, the number of AGVs, and the communication channels. To sum up, our simulations shows the impacts from wireless communication on the performance of T-MRS and reveal some key insights: 1) Wireless communication among collaborative AGVs significantly enhances online scheduling efficiency compared to the local reasoning-based baseline, even under high AGV load conditions, see Fig. 5. Meanwhile, even with limited channel resources, the tailored real-time multi-link transmission network effectively supplements partial observability and enhances scheduling efficiency in the proposed dynamic scheduling scheme, see Fig. 6. 2) Moreover, we find that adaptive communication strategies are essential for efficient scheduling performance, see Fig. 7 and Fig. 8. Multi-link transmission provides better scheduling efficiency under a low AGV-to-channel ratio, whereas reservation-based access is recommended to enhance scheduling efficiency under Sci China Inf Sci 16 

a high AGV-to-channel ratio. 3) Furthermore, the optimal solution for scheduling efficiency in wireless M2M communication differs from the optimal solution in H2H communication, see Fig. 4, Fig. 6, and Fig. 7. This implies a fundamental difference between the M2M and H2H communications and new technological opportunities. 

6 Conclusion 

This study aims to explore how proper information exchange by the tailored wireless M2M networking can sup-plement partial observability to assist complex computation for online scheduling of T-MRS. To this end, we establish a novel communication-enabled online scheduling system for T-MRS in a smart factory, and then design the scheduling-oriented wireless networking. With the proposed integrated communication and scheduling scheme, AGVs dynamically adjust collision-free and congestion-free routes, significantly enhancing online scheduling effi-ciency, as demonstrated by extensive results. Beyond performance improvements, the results reveal a fundamental difference between M2M and H2H communication, highlighting the close coupling between communication and computation in T-MRS and offering a fresh perspective for advancing future research in ICC. Building upon our established online scheduling system, future work will explore two key directions: 1) incorpo-rating distributed multi-agent reinforcement learning for adaptive collision resolution; and 2) employing intelligent radio resource scheduling under uncertainties to further enhance networking reliability and production efficiency. Our ultimate goal is to develop a comprehensive scheduling system that deeply integrates communication, compu-tation, and control for efficient scheduling in real-world smart factories. 

Acknowledgements This work was supported by the Joint funds for Regional Innovation and Development of the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No.U21A20449) and the Beijing Natural Science Foundation Program (No.L232002). 

References 

1 Chen K C, Lin S C, Hsiao J H, et al. Wireless networked multirobot systems in smart factories. Proceedings of the IEEE, 2021, 109: 468–494 2 Nie Z, Chen K C. Hypergraphical real-time multirobot task allocation in a smart factory. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, 2022, 18: 6047–6056 3 Kurunathan H, Huang H, Li K, et al. Machine learning-aided operations and communications of unmanned aerial vehicles: A contemporary survey. IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, 2023, 26: 496–533 4 He G, Cui S, Dai Y, et al. Learning task-oriented channel allocation for multi-agent communication. IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, 2022, 71: 12016–12029 5 Zhao X, Cui Q, Ni W, et al. A novel indicator for quantifying and minimizing information utility loss of robot teams. IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, 2025, 43: 3118–3133 6 Cui Q, Zhao X, Ni W, et al. Multi-agent deep reinforcement learning-based interdependent computing for mobile edge computing-assisted robot teams. IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, 2023, 72: 6599–6610 7 Chen K C, Hung H M. Wireless robotic communication for collaborative multi-agent systems. In: 2019 IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC), Shanghai, China, 2019. 1–7 8 Cui Q, You X, Wei N, et al. Overview of ai and communication for 6g network: fundamentals, challenges, and future research opportunities. Science China Information Sciences, 2025, 68: 171301 9 Mostaani A, Vu T X, Habibi H, et al. Task-oriented communication design at scale. IEEE Transactions on Communications, 2025, 73: 378–393 10 Kang X, Song B, Guo J, et al. Task-oriented image transmission for scene classification in unmanned aerial systems. IEEE Transactions on Communications, 2022, 70: 5181–5192 11 Lien S Y, Chen K C, Lin Y. Toward ubiquitous massive accesses in 3gpp machine-to-machine communications. IEEE Communications Magazine, 2011, 49: 66–74 12 Wen D, Zhou Y, Li X, et al. A survey on integrated sensing, communication, and computation. IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, 2025, 27: 3058–3098 13 Liu T, Zhang G, Cui M, et al. Task completion time minimization for uav-enabled data collection in rician fading channels. IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 2023, 10: 1134–1148 14 Luo Z, Jiang C, Liu L, et al. Flow-shop scheduling problem with batch processing machines via deep reinforcement learning for industrial internet of things. IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computational Intelligence, 2024, 8: 3518–3533 15 Zhao L, Fan J, Zhang C, et al. A drl-based reactive scheduling policy for flexible job shops with random job arrivals. IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and Engineering, 2024, 21: 2912–2923 16 Li Z, Sang H, Pan Q, et al. Dynamic agv scheduling model with special cases in matrix production workshop. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, 2023, 19: 7762–7770 17 Chen Z, Alonso-Mora J, Bai X, et al. Integrated task assignment and path planning for capacitated multi-agent pickup and delivery. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 2021, 6: 5816–5823 18 Hu H, Jia X, Liu K, et al. Self-adaptive traffic control model with behavior trees and reinforcement learning for agv in industry 4.0. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, 2021, 17: 7968–7979 19 Street C, P¨ utz S, M¨ uhlig M, et al. Congestion-aware policy synthesis for multirobot systems. IEEE Transactions on Robotics, 2021, 38: 262–280 20 Yao Y, Liu Q, Fu L, et al. A novel mathematical model for the flexible job-shop scheduling problem with limited automated guided vehicles. IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and Engineering, 2025, 22: 7449–7462 21 Zhong R, Liu X, Liu Y, et al. Path design and resource management for noma enhanced indoor intelligent robots. IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, 2022, 21: 8007–8021 22 Luo R, Ni W, Tian H, et al. Federated deep reinforcement learning for ris-assisted indoor multi-robot communication systems. IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, 2022, 71: 12321–12326 23 Nie Z, Chen K C. Distributed coordination by social learning in the multi-robot systems of a smart factory. In: 2021 IEEE Global Communications Conference (GLOBECOM), Madrid, Spain, 2021. 1–6 24 Nie Z, Chen K C. Predictive path coordination of collaborative transportation multirobot system in a smart factory. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems, 2024, 54: 6410–6423 25 Xu Q, Li J, Koenig S, et al. Multi-goal multi-agent pickup and delivery. In: 2022 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), Kyoto, Japan, 2022. 9964–9971 26 Luo Z, Jiang C, Liu L, et al. Deep-reinforcement-learning-based production scheduling in industrial internet of things. IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 2023, 10: 19725–19739 Sci China Inf Sci 17 27 Du Y, Li J, Li C, et al. A reinforcement learning approach for flexible job shop scheduling problem with crane transportation and setup times. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, 2024, 35: 5695–5709 28 Toth P, Vigo D. Vehicle routing: problems, methods, and applications. Philadelphia, PA, USA: SIAM, 2014, 2014 29 Chen J F, Wang L, Ren H, et al. An imitation learning-enhanced iterated matching algorithm for on-demand food delivery. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 2022, 23: 18603–18619 30 Liu Y, Guo B, Chen C, et al. Foodnet: Toward an optimized food delivery network based on spatial crowdsourcing. IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, 2019, 18: 1288–1301 31 Chen K C. Artificial Intelligence in Wireless Robotics. Gistrup, Denmark: River Publisher, 2020, 2020 32 3GPP. 3GPP TS 38.211: NR; Physical channels and modulation. Technical Specification 38.211, 3GPP, 2022 33 Chen K C, Zhang T, Gitlin R D, et al. Ultra-low latency mobile networking. IEEE Network, 2019, 33: 181–187 34 Liao Y, Wang Y, Cui Q, et al. Data-driven cyber-physical anomaly detection with gan in federated smart factories. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, 2025, 21: 3067–3076 35 Deng C, Fang X, Han X, et al. Ieee 802.11be wi-fi 7: New challenges and opportunities. IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, 2020, 22: 2136–2166 36 Lacalle G, Val I, Seijo O, et al. Analysis of latency and reliability improvement with multi-link operation over 802.11. In: 2021 IEEE 19th International Conference on Industrial Informatics (INDIN), New York, NY, USA: IEEE, 2021. 1–7 37 Roberts F S, Tesman B. Applied combinatorics. Boca Raton, FL, USA: CRC Press, 2024, 2024