Title: StageCraft: Execution Aware Mitigation of Distractor and Obstruction Failures in VLA Models

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.20659v1

Published Time: Tue, 24 Mar 2026 00:36:45 GMT

Number of Pages: 9

Markdown Content:
# StageCraft: Execution Aware Mitigation of Distractor and Obstruction Failures in VLA Models 

Kartikay Milind Pangaonkar ∗, Prabin Rath ∗, Omkar Patil ∗, Nakul Gopalan Arizona State University 

Fig. 1. StageCraft is a training-free method for improving policy performance that takes as input a history of policy rollouts and their associated terminal rewards, and uses in-context reasoning to infer a sequence of environment modification actions that avoid anticipated failures and increase the policy’s success rate. 

Abstract — Large scale pre-training on text and image data along with diverse robot demonstrations has helped Vision Language Action models (VLAs) to generalize to novel tasks, objects and scenes. However, these models are still susceptible to failure in the presence of execution-time impediments such as distractors and physical obstructions in the robot’s workspace. Existing policy improvement methods finetune base VLAs to improve generalization, yet they still struggle in unseen distractor settings. To address this problem, we investigate whether internet-scale pretraining of large vision-language models (VLMs) can be leveraged to reason about these im-pediments and mitigate policy failures. To this end, we propose 

StageCraft , a training-free approach to improve pretrained VLA policy performance by manipulating the environment’s initial state using VLM-based in-context reasoning. StageCraft takes policy rollout videos and success labels as input and leverages VLM’s reasoning ability to infer which objects in the initial state need to be manipulated to avoid anticipated execution failures. StageCraft is an extensible plug-and-play module that does not introduce additional constraints on the underlying policy, and only requires a few policy rollouts to work. We evaluate performance of state-of-the-art VLA models with 

StageCraft and show an absolute 40% performance improve-ment across three real world task domains involving diverse distractors and obstructions. Our simulation experiments in 

*Equal contribution 

{kpangaon, prath4, opatil3, ngopala6 }@asu.edu 

RLBench empirically show that StageCraft tailors its extent of intervention based on the strength of the underlying policy and improves its performance with more in-context samples. Videos of StageCraft in effect can be found at https://stagecraft-decorator.github.io/stagecraft. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Vision Language Action (VLA) [1], [2] models have seen rapid adoption in the field of robotics due to the promise of impressive generalization abilities. VLAs are often initialized from VLMs trained on internet-scale image and text data, and undergo pretraining on large number of demonstrations with diverse scenes, objects, embodiments and skills, making them generalize better to unseen tasks [2]. Despite this, currently state-of-the-art VLAs do not work zero-shot for novel task settings and require further fine-tuning on task specific dataset collected in the downstream environment. This often results in catastrophic forgetting in VLAs [3] impacting their generalization to novel objects and scenes. Moreover, the downstream datasets are relatively smaller in size and do not cover a wide distribution for the policy to generalize over novel objects or obstructions. This makes fine-tuned VLAs brittle to distractors in downstream tasks despite being pretrained on varied scenes and objects. 

> arXiv:2603.20659v1 [cs.RO] 21 Mar 2026

To compensate for lack of distributional coverage in su-pervised learning [4], and in lieu of more accessible and foundational policies such as VLAs [1], several methods have been proposed to improve policy performance on down-stream tasks. Policy improvement methods refine the actions generated from the policy using rollouts of the policy in the downstream environment [5] or using a separately trained value function [6]. However, these methods are expensive to deploy in the real world, and they still suffer from the persis-tent challenge of covering a sufficiently broad distribution in the downstream environment for the policy to generalize to novel objects [4]. Hence, in this work, we present StageCraft ,a complementary approach that improves policy performance by modifying the environment’s initial state rather than fine-tuning or augmenting the policy’s parameters. StageCraft 

achieves this by physically manipulating objects in the scene and removing those that are anticipated to hinder successful task completion. As VLA models gain popularity, the skills learned by these policies will be deployed in the presence of a wide variety of objects at test time. For example, a policy trained for cooking may encounter countless everyday objects on the kitchen countertop that were not present in its training distribution. It is unrealistic to continually collect more data and repeatedly fine-tune VLAs for every new deployment setting simply to maintain performance. Hence, we argue that reliable execution of pre-trained VLAs will require some form of pre-execution intervention that makes the domain more favorable for policy rollout. In this work, we take a first step in this direction by performing object-removal interventions that bring the scene back toward a visual distribution that is less susceptible to policy failure. An important question that arises here is: how do we determine which objects in the environment adversely affect the policy’s performance on the downstream task? Critically, we should not make any assumptions on the working of underlying pre-trained policy, nor the data that was used to train it. We also argue that naively manipulating the environment to remove all supposed distractors would be wasteful, especially so if the policy already generalizes well. For instance, a policy performing well in the presence of a specific distractor obviates the need for its removal. In other words, if a VLA is sophisticated enough to function well in the presence of distractors, it should not require any intervention. In contrast, if the policy fails due to distractors, minimal environment modifications are needed to improve downstream performance. To tackle this problem, we leverage the in-context reason-ing capabilities of VLM [7] and prompt it with a few rollout episodes of the policy in the downstream environment with 

expected distractor objects. This not only prevents us from making assumptions on the training data of the policy, but also allows us to record the policy’s robustness to different objects. We then leverage VLM’s grounded text and vision based priors that help it reason on the environment states of these rollouts and the consequent success or failure of the policy. From the in-context episodes and the execution results, the VLM reasons about a new initial environment state, identifying objects in the scene that need to be phys-ically manipulated for increasing the chance of a successful policy execution. Our method is inspired by how humans prepare their environment before executing a skill, simplifying the task representation. Kirsh et al. [8] argue that experts require less deliberation about the environment and are robust to its varying configurations, executing their skills with little to no preparation. In contrast, non-experts can benefit from task environments that are prepared and more constrained. We use this insight to argue that as VLAs become more accomplished in executing their skill in diverse environ-ments, they will require less intervention or preparation of the environment. Hence, StageCraft is designed to first reason if manipulation of a distractor is at all necessary given the history of policy rollouts, and then to prepare the environment when doing so is deemed essential for successful policy execution. To summarize, our contributions are as follows:  

> •

We propose StageCraft (shown in Figure 1), a training-free method that reasons about the initial environment state based on the past history of policy rollouts, and manipulates only the distractor objects deemed neces-sary for improving policy performance.  

> •

We experimentally evaluate StageCraft in a multi-task setting on a Franka FR3 robot across three real-world task domains, and find that it improves the performance of SmolVLA [1] and Pi0.5 [2] by an absolute average 

40% under diverse obstruction and clutter scenarios across the three real world task domains.  

> •

Our RLBench simulation results show that StageCraft 

consistently improves performance as the number of in-context episodes increase, generalizes across base policies of varying strength, and remains effective under our ablation studies.  

> •

We design StageCraft to be an extensible plug-and-play module that can be used as a decorator for VLA execution and open-source the implementation so that the broader community can benefit from our research on initial environment state manipulation for policy performance improvement. II. R ELATED WORKS 

A. Generalization in VLAs and Policy Improvement 

While new VLAs are increasingly being proposed in literature, they still lack the generalization required for zero-shot usage in novel tasks. As a consequence, VLAs are often fine-tuned on narrow task-specific datasets, resulting in catas-trophic forgetting of the generalization abilities gained during the pretraining phase [3]. Further, VLAs are often evaluated in very limited settings [9] that closely match their training distribution. For instance, Fang et al. [9] evaluate several VLAs and note that they fall short in terms of execution with out-of-distribution objects and do not generalize well with complex language commands. Policy improvement typically aims to improve the perfor-mance of pre-trained policies for downstream tasks using training methods such as reinforcement learning [5], adapter learning [10], and value function guidance [6]. These meth-ods suffer from high implementation costs, and often require several hundreds of episodes to improve policy performance for a given reward. In contrast to these methods, we take a training-free approach of improving the underlying policy, where we modify the initial state of the environment to avoid expected failures. Our plug-and-play method can also be used alongside any of these aforementioned policy improvement methods yielding further gains in performance. Moreover, our method conservatively handles out of distribution objects not seen even during the training or policy improvement process, by using the reasoning capabilities of a VLM trained on internet scaled image and text data. 

B. Reasoning using VLM Models 

Vision Language Models (VLMs) have been leveraged in robotics for reasoning over the visual modality such as behavior-critics for robot trajectories [11], success detectors or reward models for tasks [12], and reasoning over ma-nipulation failures [13]. Duan et al. [13] fine-tune a VLM on simulated failure data to develop detection and reasoning capabilities for manipulation failures. Interestingly, Yecheng Jason et al. [14] show that VLMs can act as in-context value learners, and used this capability for task progress prediction. Our work uses the in-context learning capabilities of VLMs to reason about the initial environment state, given a history of rollout episodes and the resulting success or failure. Several works have used reasoning mechanisms such as chain-of-thought (CoT) [15] in VLAs to improve policy generalization. CoT has been applied to text [16], images [17] and actions [18] modalities in VLAs during the pre-training phase for better policy generalization. However, these methods require extensive architectural changes [16]– [18], data re-annotation [16], and do not transfer to other state-of-the-art VLA models. Moreover, these methods pri-marily operate through sub-task [16] or sub-goal [17], [18] generation to improve the linguistic and visual generalization capabilities, and do not specifically reason about the environ-ment preconditions before executing the skill. In contrast, 

StageCraft is a plug-and-play module that leverages CoT and can be used for any downstream VLA before executing the policy in the environment. To the best of the authors’ knowledge, none of the existing methods reason over policy performance to make environment interventions that improve policy success. 

C. Environment Preconditions 

Environment preconditions have traditionally been studied in planning domains where a skill would be executed when the specified symbolic predicates are true for a given state [19]. Sharma et al. [20] learn a classifier on continuous representations for pairwise objects in the scene to predict if the precondition is satisfied or not. In contrast, StageCraft 

reasons only over distractors in the scene, without explicitly modeling objects’ spatial positions. It also does not assume access to the policy’s training data, and generalizes conser-vatively to unseen objects. A closely related work is ReSET [21], which reconfigures the initial environment state to lie in a more concentrated distribution termed “anchor states.” While it addresses a different problem, ReSET assumes access to the policy training data and relies on additional human task-specific data, including scene resets and robot play data, to learn corrective actions. In contrast, StageCraft 

uses a VLM as a high-level planner over primitive actions that manipulate the environment, without collecting extra human intervention data. Moreover, StageCraft generalizes to unseen distractors and obstructions, unlike ReSET. III. M ETHOD 

A. Problem Formulation 

We model a downstream task as a Markov decision process 

M = ( S, O, A, p, H, ρ 0), where S is the state space, O

is the observation space, A is the action space, p(st+1 |

st, a t) is the transition kernel, H is the horizon, and ρ0 is the initial-state distribution. For notational convenience, we assume that an initial state s0 ∈ S admits a decomposition 

s0 = ( u0, X0), where u0 denotes non-object factors such as robot configuration and environment parameters, and X0

is the set of all objects present in the scene. We further decompose X0 = Xrev ∪ X dist , where Xrev denotes a fixed set of task-relevant objects that are present in every episode, and Xdist ⊆ X denotes the set of distractor objects. Here 

X = {x1, . . . , x N } denotes the finite set of distractor objects that are expected to interact with the policy environment, with |X dist | ≤ N . Each object xj is represented by its semantic category and pose. We consider a fixed policy π(a | o) that maps observations 

o ∈ O to actions. We do not assume access to the policy’s training data or the MDP under which it was trained. When deployed in the downstream environment M and initialized at s0 = ( u0, X0), the policy may fail due to the presence of objects in X0 that were not encountered during training. Our goal is to develop a module, StageCraft , that operates prior to policy execution and infers a subset of objects 

Xmanip ⊆ Xdist that should be manipulated. Importantly, 

StageCraft should try to minimize the number of objects being manipulated |X manip |, with the upper bound being 

Xmanip = Xdist . Applying the corresponding action primitives to these objects transforms the initial state to s′ 

> 0

= ( u0, X ′

> 0

)

where X ′ 

> 0

= {X rev ∪ X dist } \ X manip . The policy π is then executed from the modified state s′ 

> 0

under the same environment dynamics. Moreover, we assume access to a finite set of action primitives P = {ϕ1, . . . , ϕ K }, which can be applied to transform the initial state s0 to a modified state s′

> 0

. Each primitive ϕk is a parameterized, open-loop controller that operates on the environment state (e.g., grasping, go-to-point, pick, place). Execution of a primitive induces state transitions according to the same environment dynamics p.Fig. 2. We empirically evaluate StageCraft with two state-of-the-art VLA models, Pi0.5 [2] and SmolVLA [1], under challenging clutter and obstruction settings. In the setup shown, StageCraft identifies "pink pattern cloth" and "red write santa plush" as potential failure-inducing distractors for the stack cups task. These objects are then detected and removed from the robot’s workspace via primitive pick-and-place actions, after which the policy is executed and successfully completes the task. 

B. StageCraft: Object-Set Creation 

For a given initial state s0, StageCraft infers a subset of distractor objects, Xmanip ⊆ X dist , whose removal aims to maximize the policy’s success rate. Additionally, StageCraft 

seeks to minimize the number of removed distractors |X manip |

whenever the policy’s success rate is not anticipated to decrease. There are two challenges in this problem: (i) We do not know which objects pose as distractors for the policy, as we do not assume access to the policy’s training data or environment. Defining object relevance for the policy requires a causal understanding of how the policy was trained, which is harder to reason about without knowing the training distribution or goals of a task. Hence, StageCraft 

does not explicitly assume knowledge of the relevant objects in the scene. Instead, StageCraft treats all objects in the scene on equal footing and operates over sets of objects that empirically demonstrate high performance across episodes. Even if StageCraft was aware of the objects in the training distribution, naively removing all distractor objects from the scene, especially for VLAs pretrained on varied objects, skills and scenes is wasteful and unnecessary. Hence 

StageCraft uses a few policy rollouts as a weak Monte Carlo estimate of the underlying policy’s robustness to different sets of objects from collected episodes. 

To estimate the policy’s robustness to distractors, in a manner akin to online policy improvement, we collect roll-outs of the fixed (VLA) policy π in the MDP M from different initial states s0, each instantiated with a distractor set Xdist ⊆ X . For each fixed distractor subset X (i) 

> dist

among the N total sets, we collect M episodes by varying the object poses to obtain a reliable estimate of the policy’s success rate. Emphasizing the object-centric structure of the initial state: 

B =

n u(i,j )0 , X (i)0 , y (i,j )oN, M i=1 , j =1 

,

where X (i)0 denotes the i-th object set, u(i,j )0 corresponds to the j-th instantiation (e.g., pose configuration) of that set, and y(i,j ) ∈ { 0, 1} denotes the success of the corresponding rollout. A small value of M leads to a poor Monte Carlo estimate of the policy’s success rate for each distractor configuration, while a small value of N limits StageCraft ’s ability to estimate the policy’s robustness to different objects, potentially causing it to default to removing all distractors, i.e., Xmanip = Xdist .

C. StageCraft: Object-Set Transition 

For each distractor set X (i) 

> dist

, an empirical success rate 

sr (i) is computed from the collected rollouts B. We retain a collection of distractor subsets 

S = {sj ⊆ X | sr( sj ) ≥ sr max } ,

where sr max = max s⊆X sr( s) denotes the highest ob-served success rate among all in-context episodes. Given a new initial state s0 = (u0, Xrev ∪ X dist ), the largest subset sj ∈ S is selected such that sj ⊆ X dist . The Fig. 3. Real-world task domains used to evaluate StageCraft . The stack cups and setup plate tasks require precise manipulation across four subtasks, whereas block in bowl is simpler and primarily requires accurate gripper alignment with the block for successful completion. 

difference between Xdist and sj determines the set of object-level modifications to be executed by the action primitives in order to transform the environment prior to policy execution. In other words, among the subsets of objects in S empirically observed to result in the highest success rate, we choose the largest subset that has all the objects present in the new scene 

X0. All the remaining objects in X0 form Xmanip .This construction also ensures that StageCraft acts conser-vatively with respect to policy performance in the presence of distractors. Unseen distractors are automatically removed, since no subset in S contains them. If the underlying policy is robust to distractors, then with sufficient rollouts, S

will include larger subsets containing multiple distractors, providing stronger fallbacks in which policy performance is preserved. Conversely, for policies that are not robust to distractors, S will consist of subsets with fewer distractors, requiring StageCraft to apply more extensive object manipu-lations prior to policy execution. Overall, StageCraft adapts its corrective actions to the robustness of the underlying policy, scaling the degree of intervention according to the observed performance. 

D. Vision Language Model Reasoning 

To execute StageCraft we need consistent object-centric representations of the initial states of the collected episodes and for the new initial state observed during policy evalua-tion. As shown in Figure 2, our method leverages the internet scaled reasoning capabilities of Vision Language Models (VLMs) for obtaining the object centric representations and inferring the minimal manipulation steps required, taking into consideration the action primitives available for the robot. Specifically, we leverage in-context reasoning within VLMs to make it follow the object-set creation and transition strategy laid out in Section III-B III-C. The VLM is prompted to first create object-sets with consistent names based on the in-context initial states of the episodes. Next the VLM infers success rate for each object-set based on the reward assigned to the corresponding episodes and filters the object-sets having the highest success rate. Once the object-sets have been filtered, the VLM executes the transition strategy, choosing the minimum manipulation actions to be executed in the given initial state while accounting for the skill af-fordances, leading to an object-set with the highest observed success rate. This strategy is explicitly specified to the VLM    

> Fig. 4. Set of 8distractor objects used in our real-world experiments. The gray collector bin is also a distractor as it was not present in the robot’s workspace during data collection.

model in the input language instruction prompt present on our webpage https://stagecraft-decorator.github.io/stagecraft. We make two assumptions for StageCraft that are neces-sary to guarantee an improvement over the baseline VLA. First, we ensure that the task-relevant object set Xrev is present in at least a few successful policy rollouts used for the VLM in-context query. Second, we expect the VLM follows the set-transition strategy accurately as specified in the input language prompt. Under these assumptions, the inferred set 

S always satisfies Xrev ⊆ S, ensuring that StageCraft never removes any task-relevant object that is required for task completion. 

E. Environment Modification using Primitive Actions 

The VLM generates short descriptions of the objects in the environment that should be removed from the robot’s workspace to avoid anticipated failures. We use these de-scriptions to prompt the SAM3 [22] model to detect bound-ing boxes for the corresponding objects. We then project the centers of these bounding boxes back into 3D coordinates in the robot’s base frame using calibrated camera extrinsics and intrinsics. Finally, we use an inverse kinematics based primitive motion planner to execute pick-and-place actions that remove the objects from the robot’s workspace and deposit them into a collection bin placed beside the robot. Fig. 5. Task success rates for real-world robot experiments with Pi0.5 and SmolVLA under the Base , Distractor , and StageCraft settings. StageCraft   

> recovers baseline performance, bringing success rates closer to those ob-served in the Base setting.

IV. R ESULTS 

We show the utility of StageCraft in improving pretrained policy performance in downstream environments for Pi0.5 and SmolVLA through real robot and simulation experi-ments. 

A. Robot Experiment Setup 

We evaluate StageCraft on three real-world task domains, as shown in Figure 3. The tasks and their associated natural language instructions are as follows: Stack Cups , stack both the left and right cups on top of the center cup; Setup Plate ,take a plate from the rack and serve a piece of bread on the plate; and Block in Bowl , pick up the block and place it in the bowl. For VLA fine-tuning, we collected data for a larger set of 10 tasks, which includes demonstrations for the three tasks above. We recorded 60 demonstrations per task, and crowdsourced language instructions for each demonstration via Mechanical Turk [23]. We then fully fine-tuned the base VLA models, Pi0.5 and SmolVLA, using pretrained weights from LeRobot [24]. Our dataset contains two camera streams from Intel D435 sensors: a wrist-mounted camera and a third-person front-facing camera. Proprioceptive state and actions are represented in absolute joint space. Our experiments in-clude a fixed set of 8 distractor objects, as shown in Figure 4. These objects were never present in the robot’s workspace during data collection, making them well-suited for testing visual out-of-distribution failures in the baseline VLA mod-els. All our real-world experiments use gemini-3.1-pro 

VLM for reasoning. Additionally we show ablation results on gemini-2.5-pro and gpt-5.2-pro models. 

B. Real-World Result Analysis 

Figure 5 shows the success rate (SR) of the baseline VLA models across three experimental settings: (1) Base , where    

> Fig. 6. Comparison of performance of three different VLM’s for (a) prompt following accuracy, (b) task success rate and (c) number of corrective steps per rollout for the block in bowl task. Models with lower prompt following accuracy fail to take correct environment modification steps thus resulting in lower policy success rates.

the policy is evaluated in the same environment configura-tion used during data collection; (2) Distractor , where we introduce clutter and obstruction by adding 1–5 distractor objects to the base environment; and (3) StageCraft , where we modify the environment using our proposed method to improve the policy’s expected performance. Across all tasks, we observe consistent gains for both VLA baselines, with an average absolute SR improvement of 40% . We use 10 policy rollouts for in-context reasoning and evaluate StageCraft on 

15 additional rollouts in the Distractor setup. In our real-robot experiments, we ensured that all in-context episodes included the gray object-disposal bin in the robot’s workspace, since it is required to hide distractor objects from the camera view during StageCraft evaluation rollouts. However, this bin was not present during data collection. Inspecting the reasoning traces, we find that 

StageCraft consistently classifies the gray bin as a task-relevant object across all real-world experiments, aligning with our minimal environment modification hypothesis. Furthermore, we manually evaluate the reasoning trace for each rollout and compute prompt following accuracy by comparing the environment modification steps deduced by the VLM against the ground-truth minimum steps. We find that gemini-3.1-pro VLM achieves an average 95% 

prompt following accuracy across the three real-world tasks. A correct deduction requires the model to (i) consistently identify environment objects across all in-context obser-vations, and (ii) correctly follow the set-transition prompt described in Section III-C. Overall, we find that modern state-of-the-art VLMs are more reliable on this task than previous generations. Figure 6 compares task success rate, prompt-following ac-curacy and the average number of environment modification steps taken by two additional VLMs, gemini-2.5-pro 

and gpt-5.2-pro , for the block in bowl task. We observe that older-generation VLMs often fail to consistently identify the same objects across rollouts, and consequently struggle to follow the set-transition strategy correctly. Models with higher prompt-following accuracy naturally align more closely with the required minimal steps, supporting our Fig. 7. RLBench environments Zero , One , Two , Three in order from left to right, with the numeric name denoting the number of distractors in the scene. Environment Three is used for evaluating StageCraft .                      

> Fig. 8. Success rates for πweak and πstrong on environments Zero ,One ,
> Two and Three of the pick the red cup task. We see that the performance πweak deteriorates significantly as distractors are introduced, while that of πstrong stays relatively strong. This trend is also reflected in the number of interventions carried out by StageCraft in environment Three .

hypothesis of performance-informed minimal environment modification as discussed in Section III-C. Based on this result, we expect future generations of VLMs to further improve prompt-following accuracy and to infer minimal environment modifications more precisely within the Stage-Craft framework. 

C. Simulation Experiments 

Our simulation experiments are designed to answer the following questions regarding StageCraft ’s capabilities: (i) Does StageCraft use the underlying policy’s robustness to distractors to inform the extent of environment interventions required? (ii) Does the performance of StageCraft improve upon increasing the number of samples for each distractor setting? (iii) Does the object-set creation and transition strategy lead to more effective and reliable environment interventions than naively querying a VLM? We investigate these questions by training two poli-cies on the task pick the red cup using 50 and 250 

demonstrations, referred to as πweak and πstrong , respectively. Specifically, we fine-tune a pretrained SmolVLA on the collected demonstrations. The resulting policies achieve suc-cess rates of 78% for πweak and 95% for πstrong on the base environments named Zero . Further, as illustrated in Fig. 7, we create three distractor variants of the environ-ment, One , Two and Three . For all experiments, we use 

gemini-2.5-pro as the VLM due to its relatively higher inference latency, although we expect better performance with stronger VLMs as empirically shown in our real robot experiments. To evaluate how StageCraft adjusts its extent of inter-vention based on the strength of the underlying policy, we evaluate it with πweak and πstrong in the environment Three .We populate the in-context buffer with rollouts from Zero ,

One and Two for each policy respectively. As seen in Fig.                  

> Fig. 9. Success rates for πweak on environments Zero ,One ,Two and
> Three of the pick the red cup task. Here we study the results with
> 1and 20 in-context samples, and we see that with more samples, StageCraft
> better estimates the number of interventions required, also improving the policy performance.

8, πstrong experiences less deterioration in performance as distractors increase, whereas the performance of πweak swiftly drops. Accordingly, StageCraft takes 3.09 steps on average over 100 evaluation episodes for πweak , and only 1.14 steps in the same setting for πstrong . StageCraft improves the performance of πstrong by 13% , increasing it to 98% , and improves the performance of πweak by 66% from 0% in the evaluation environment Three . These results demonstrate that StageCraft adjusts its intervention based on the strength of the underlying policy, taking more corrective steps for weaker policies while yielding larger gains in performance. Next, we evaluate how StageCraft performs with more in-context samples per distractor setting. Specifically, we evaluate whether StageCraft benefits from a better Monte Carlo estimation of the policy’s robustness to the distractors in an environment. We do this by evaluating the performance of πweak with StageCraft when VLM’s in-context buffer is populated with 1 and 20 episodes of both environments 

One and Two . The performance of πweak on the evaluation environment Three is shown in Fig. 9. We find that when only one episode for each of One and Two are included in 

StageCraft’s in-context buffer, its estimation of the policy’s robustness to the distractors in the scene negatively affects it’s performance. For example, when just one successful episode for environment Two is included in the VLM’s context, StageCraft assumes that the policy is robust to distractors in environment Two and does not act to remove the corresponding object set. However, this negatively affects the policy performance, as the policy is only achieves a success rate of 21% in environment Two , as seen in Fig. 9. Including more in-context samples for environment Two 

generates a better estimate of the policy performance with the corresponding distractors and helps StageCraft take the required corrective steps. This can be seen from the increase in the number of average interventions ( 2.2 as compared to 

1.15 ) and the consequent increase in performance ( 54% as compared to 49% ) with 20 in-context rollouts for environ-ments One and Two over just 1 rollout of each. Thus, the performance of our method is expected to improve with more in-context samples per distractor setting. Finally, we evaluate whether our object-set creation and transition formulation is important for StageCraft , and whether naively prompting the VLM yields the same result. Specifically, we exclude the object-set creation and transition strategy from the prompt to the VLM, while preserving the larger objective: to remove the minimum number of distractors from the scene to improve policy performance based on the provided in-context episodes. To test this, we evaluate πstrong on a novel distractor environment with 10 in-context samples for each distractor setting. We find that not only did the prompt devoid of the object-set strategy (prompt-baseline ) remove more objects on average (1.88 compared to 1.14 for StageCraft ), but it also removed items crucial for task completion rather than distractors, such as the blue cup itself. Out of 25 episodes that we qualitatively analyzed, prompt-baseline was less reliable in terms of the number of objects removed (with a coefficient of variance of 57.8% compared to 13.62%). It also removed all distractors in 4 cases, and the blue cup itself in 12 cases. This highlights that the object-set based formulation leads to more consistent and accurate predictions, and relying solely on the open-ended reasoning capabilities of state-of-the-art VLMs does not yield consistent or accurate inferences about the initial environment state. V. C ONCLUSION 

We propose StageCraft , a novel method that physically in-tervenes to manipulate the environment’s initial state in order to improve the performance of VLA policies in the presence of distractors. StageCraft informs its interventions based on the policy’s robustness to sets of objects in the scene, esti-mated from the in-context episodes. Through extensive real-world experimentation, we show that we are able to improve the performance of Pi0.5 and SmolVLA by an absolute average of 40% on three downstream tasks in the presence of distractors, with only 10 in-context episodes. Through our simulation experiments, we show that StageCraft adapts the extent of its intervention to the performance of the underlying policy, and identifies potential distractors more accurately as the number of in-context samples increases. We ablate our method to show the utility of the proposed object-set formalism, and empirically demonstrate that open-ended reasoning using state-of-the-art VLMs generates inconsistent and inaccurate responses for our problem. We open-source 

StageCraft to encourage collaboration with the wider com-munity, and hope that our method serves as a stepping stone for future research on manipulating the initial state of the environment to improve policy performance. VI. L IMITATIONS 

The capabilities of StageCraft are ultimately bounded by the underlying VLM. As we scale the number of rollouts to obtain better Monte Carlo estimates of VLA performance, we eventually hit the VLM’s context-length limit, since each episode includes image observations that are token-heavy. We expect future VLMs with larger context windows to scale better, and there is also scope to improve scalability by integrating external context storage and retrieval methods, such as RAG [25], into StageCraft . In this work, we do not address all possible distractor scenarios, and we restrict our formalism to object-based sets. Consequently, StageCraft is not suitable for environments in which distractors cannot be organized into discrete object sets. REFERENCES [1] M. Shukor, D. Aubakirova, F. Capuano, P. Kooijmans, S. Palma, A. Zouitine, M. Aractingi, C. Pascal, M. Russi, A. Marafioti et al. ,“Smolvla: A vision-language-action model for affordable and efficient robotics,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.01844 , 2025. [2] P. Intelligence, K. Black, N. Brown, J. Darpinian, K. Dhabalia, D. Driess, A. Esmail, M. Equi, C. Finn, N. Fusai et al. , “ π0.5: a vision-language-action model with open-world generalization,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.16054 , 2025. [3] A. J. Hancock, X. Wu, L. Zha, O. Russakovsky, and A. Majumdar, “Actions as language: Fine-tuning vlms into vlas without catastrophic forgetting,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.22195 , 2025. [4] W. Pumacay, I. Singh, J. Duan, R. Krishna, J. Thomason, and D. Fox, “The colosseum: A benchmark for evaluating generalization for robotic manipulation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.08191 , 2024. [5] A. Z. Ren, J. Lidard, L. L. Ankile, A. Simeonov, P. Agrawal, A. Majumdar, B. Burchfiel, H. Dai, and M. Simchowitz, “Diffusion policy policy optimization,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https: //arxiv.org/abs/2409.00588 [6] M. Nakamoto, O. Mees, A. Kumar, and S. Levine, “Steering your generalists: Improving robotic foundation models via value guidance,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.13816 [7] Z. Li, X. Wu, H. Du, F. Liu, H. Nghiem, and G. Shi, “A survey of state of the art large vision language models: Benchmark evaluations and challenges,” in Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , 2025, pp. 1587–1606. [8] D. Kirsh, “The intelligent use of space,” Artificial intelligence , vol. 73, no. 1-2, pp. 31–68, 1995. [9] I. Fang, J. Zhang, S. Tong, and C. Feng, “From intention to execu-tion: Probing the generalization boundaries of vision-language-action models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.09930 , 2025. [10] A. Wagenmaker, M. Nakamoto, Y. Zhang, S. Park, W. Yagoub, A. Nagabandi, A. Gupta, and S. Levine, “Steering your diffusion policy with latent space reinforcement learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.15799 , 2025. [11] L. Guan, Y. Zhou, D. Liu, Y. Zha, H. B. Amor, and S. Kambhampati, “Task success is not enough: Investigating the use of video-language models as behavior critics for catching undesirable agent behaviors,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.04210 , 2024. [12] Y. Du, K. Konyushkova, M. Denil, A. Raju, J. Landon, F. Hill, N. De Freitas, and S. Cabi, “Vision-language models as success detectors,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.07280 , 2023. [13] J. Duan, W. Pumacay, N. Kumar, Y. R. Wang, S. Tian, W. Yuan, R. Krishna, D. Fox, A. Mandlekar, and Y. Guo, “Aha: A vision-language-model for detecting and reasoning over failures in robotic manipulation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.00371 , 2024. [14] Y. J. Ma, J. Hejna, C. Fu, D. Shah, J. Liang, Z. Xu, S. Kirmani, P. Xu, D. Driess, T. Xiao et al. , “Vision language models are in-context value learners,” in The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. [15] J. Wei, X. Wang, D. Schuurmans, M. Bosma, F. Xia, E. Chi, Q. V. Le, D. Zhou et al. , “Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models,” Advances in neural information processing systems , vol. 35, pp. 24 824–24 837, 2022. [16] M. Zawalski, W. Chen, K. Pertsch, O. Mees, C. Finn, and S. Levine, “Robotic control via embodied chain-of-thought reasoning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.08693 , 2024. [17] Q. Zhao, Y. Lu, M. J. Kim, Z. Fu, Z. Zhang, Y. Wu, Z. Li, Q. Ma, S. Han, C. Finn et al. , “Cot-vla: Visual chain-of-thought reasoning for vision-language-action models,” in Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , 2025, pp. 1702–1713. [18] L. Zhong, Y. Liu, Y. Wei, Z. Xiong, M. Yao, S. Liu, and G. Ren, “Acot-vla: Action chain-of-thought for vision-language-action models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.11404 , 2026. [19] O. Kroemer, S. Niekum, and G. Konidaris, “A review of robot learning for manipulation: Challenges, representations, and algorithms,” Jour-nal of machine learning research , vol. 22, no. 30, pp. 1–82, 2021. [20] M. Sharma and O. Kroemer, “Relational learning for skill precondi-tions,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.01693 , 2020. [21] Y. Dai, A. Keyser, and D. P. Losey, “Prepare before you act: Learning from humans to rearrange initial states,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.18043 , 2025. [22] N. Carion, L. Gustafson, Y.-T. Hu, S. Debnath, R. Hu, D. Suris, C. Ryali, K. V. Alwala, H. Khedr, A. Huang et al. , “Sam 3: Segment anything with concepts,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.16719 , 2025. [23] K. Crowston, “Amazon mechanical turk: A research tool for orga-nizations and information systems scholars,” in Shaping the Future of ICT Research. Methods and Approaches: IFIP WG 8.2, Working Conference, Tampa, FL, USA, December 13-14, 2012. Proceedings .Springer, 2012, pp. 210–221. [24] R. Cadene, S. Aliberts, F. Capuano, M. Aractingi, A. Zouitine, P. Kooijmans, J. Choghari, M. Russi, C. Pascal, S. Palma et al. ,“Lerobot: An open-source library for end-to-end robot learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.22818 , 2026. [25] P. Lewis, E. Perez, A. Piktus, F. Petroni, V. Karpukhin, N. Goyal, H. K¨ uttler, M. Lewis, W.-t. Yih, T. Rockt¨ aschel et al. , “Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks,” Advances in neural information processing systems , vol. 33, pp. 9459–9474, 2020.