Title: CTS-PLL: A Robust and Anytime Framework for Collaborative Task Sequencing and Multi-Agent Path Finding

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.25121v1

Published Time: Fri, 27 Mar 2026 00:39:38 GMT

Number of Pages: 8

Markdown Content:
# CTS-PLL: A Robust and Anytime Framework for Collaborative Task Sequencing and Multi-Agent Path Finding 

Junkai Jiang 1, Yitao Xu 1, Ruochen Li 1, Shaobing Xu 1, and Jianqiang Wang 1∗

Abstract — The Collaborative Task Sequencing and Multi-Agent Path Finding (CTS-MAPF) problem requires agents to accomplish sequences of tasks while avoiding collisions, posing significant challenges due to its combinatorial complexity. This work introduces CTS-PLL, a hierarchical framework that ex-tends the configuration-based CTS-MAPF planning paradigm with two key enhancements: a lock agents detection and release mechanism leveraging a complete planning method for local re-planning, and an anytime refinement procedure based on Large Neighborhood Search (LNS). These additions ensure robustness in dense environments and enable continuous improvement of solution quality. Extensive evaluations across sparse and dense benchmarks demonstrate that CTS-PLL achieves higher success rates and solution quality compared with existing methods, while maintaining competitive runtime efficiency. Real-world robot experiments further demonstrate the feasibility of the approach in practice. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Multi-Agent Path Finding (MAPF) studies how multiple agents move from given start locations to goal locations with-out collisions. In many practical scenarios, however, agents must additionally complete a sequence of tasks that may involve cooperative execution. This more specific problem, known as Collaborative Task Sequencing and Multi-Agent Path Finding (CTS-MAPF) [1], integrates task sequence with motion planning in a unified framework. Formally, CTS-MAPF requires agents to accomplish sequences of tasks while ensuring collision-free paths and eventually reach-ing their designated goals. By coupling combinatorial task-order decisions with multi-agent path planning, CTS-MAPF greatly enlarges the search space and is therefore signifi-cantly harder to solve efficiently and reliably than classical MAPF. The CTS-MAPF problem captures the essence of many real-world applications, such as robotic fulfillment centers [2], coordinated fleets of service robots [3], [4], and au-tonomous vehicles operating in structured environment [5]. In these scenarios, agents must complete multiple dependent tasks while avoiding conflicts, which imposes both sequenc-ing and spatial constraints. The key challenge lies not only in handling the exponential growth of the search space, but also in designing solvers that achieve a practical balance between computational efficiency and solution quality. Striking this balance is crucial for applying CTS-MAPF methods to large and complex environments. 

A. Related Work 1) Classical MAPF Solvers: Research on the MAPF prob-lem has produced a wide variety of solution strategies. Cen-tralized approaches, such as Conflict-Based Search (CBS) [6], and its extensions like ICBS [7], ECBS [8] and EECBS [9], can guarantee optimal or bounded-suboptimal solutions. However, their scalability is limited due to the exponential growth of conflicts in dense environments. To address this, decentralized methods such as prioritized planning [10], rule-based heuristics [11], and reinforcement learning–based frameworks [12], [13] have been proposed, which improve computational efficiency but lack completeness or optimality guarantees. In addition, configuration-based solvers have emerged as an efficient alternative. Priority Inheritance with Back-tracking (PIBT) [14] allows agents to plan iteratively with lightweight local decisions, achieving remarkable scalability. More recently, LaCAM [15] was introduced as a search-based configuration method, providing completeness while maintaining efficiency. Nevertheless, LaCAM has yet to be explored in the CTS-MAPF context, where task sequencing constraints impose additional challenges. 

2) Path Refinement and Anytime Approaches: Beyond the generation of feasible solutions, improving solution quality has been another active research direction. Large Neighborhood Search (LNS) has been applied to MAPF as an anytime refinement mechanism [16], enabling iterative improvement by re-planning subsets of agents. Variants of LNS have been combined with PIBT or LaCAM to reduce flowtime or makespan in complex environments [17], [18]. More generally, anytime algorithms provide a framework to quickly produce feasible solutions and then refine them given more time. While these strategies have shown success in MAPF, their application to CTS-MAPF remains unexplored. 

3) CTS-MAPF and Related Problems: The CTS-MAPF problem explicitly integrates collaborative task sequencing with MAPF, making it more challenging than classical MAPF. CBSS [19] has been proposed as a combinatorial extension of CBS, achieving task assignment, scheduling and path planning through the combination of TSP (Trav-eling Salesman Problem) and CBS, but its scalability re-mains limited in dense environments. CTS-CBS [1] extends CBS to handle CTS-MAPF, achieving optimal or bounded-suboptimal solutions but also suffering from scalability due to high branching factors. CTS-PIBT [20] introduced aconfiguration-based solver for CTS-MAPF, demonstrating superior efficiency and success rates in large-scale instances. However, as a PIBT-based method, it remains incomplete and offers limited support for solution refinement. Other related problems share similarities with CTS-MAPF but differ in formulation. Multi-goal MAPF (MG-MAPF) [21] requires agents to visit multiple goals but does not 

> arXiv:2603.25121v1 [cs.RO] 26 Mar 2026

distinguish tasks from goals. Multi-agent pickup and delivery (MAPD) [22] involves task assignment and ordering but restricts tasks to paired pickup–delivery operations. Inte-grated task sequencing and path planning problems [23], [24] consider task assignment and scheduling jointly, but typically lack the generality needed for CTS-MAPF. These distinctions highlight the uniqueness of CTS-MAPF and the need for dedicated methods. 

B. Motivations and Contributions 

Although recent progress has been made, CTS-MAPF remains challenging. Existing solvers based on CBS ensure high-quality solutions but scale poorly in complex environ-ments. Configuration-based approaches such as CTS-PIBT offer high efficiency but are incomplete. Meanwhile, path refinement techniques such as LNS and anytime search have demonstrated strong potential in MAPF but are rarely incorporated into CTS-MAPF frameworks. To address these limitations, we propose a new CTS-MAPF solver that augments CTS-PIBT with two key com-ponents. First, a lock agents detection module identifies stag-nated agents and employs MAPF solvers with completeness for local re-planning, maintaining efficiency while improv-ing robustness. Second, we extend the anytime mechanism by incorporating an LNS-based refinement procedure after each planning cycle, allowing the algorithm to continuously improve solution quality over time. The contributions of this work are summarized as follows: 1) We develop a novel CTS-MAPF solver that enhancing the success rate of configuration-based method through the lock agents detection and release mechanism. 2) We introduce an enhanced anytime mechanism that integrates an LNS-based refinement step, enabling pro-gressive improvements in solution quality. 3) We conduct extensive evaluations in various environ-ments to demonstrate the superior performance of our algorithm, and perform practical robot tests to validate its effectiveness in real-world scenarios. II. P RELIMINARIES 

A. Problem Definition 

The CTS-MAPF problem has been formally defined in [20]. Here, we briefly restate the essential elements and notations to keep this paper self-contained. The environment is modeled as an undirected graph G =(V, E ), where V is the set of vertices and E ⊆ V ×V denotes the edges. Time is discretized into steps t = 0 , 1, . . . . A set of agents A = {a1, . . . , a m} is deployed, where each agent 

aj has an initial position sj ∈ V and a terminal goal gj ∈ V .The path of agent aj is denoted by πj , where πj (t) represents the vertex occupied by agent aj at t. At each time step, an agent may either remain at its current vertex or move to a neighboring one. Two types of conflicts are prohibited: (i) 

vertex conflict , i.e., πj (t) = πk(t) for some j̸ = k; and (ii) 

edge conflict , i.e., (πj (t), π j (t + 1)) = ( πk(t + 1) , π k(t)) for some j̸ = k.CTS-MAPF involves a set of tasks Vt = {vt1, . . . , v tn }.Each task vti corresponds to a specific vertex that must be visited by a designated subset of agents f (vti ) ⊆ A . Each agent is required to complete all of its targets, which include visiting every task vertex assigned to it and reaching its terminal goal. Thus, solving CTS-MAPF requires determin-ing: (1) the task sequence of each agent, and (2) joint path 

πj such that πj (0) = sj , all assigned tasks are completed sequentially, and terminates at gj .A feasible solution of CTS-MAPF is a joint path Π = 

{π1, . . . , π m} that satisfies three conditions: (i) all tasks vti 

are completed while each corresponding agent has visited them at least once; (ii) agents do not experience either vertex or edge conflicts during execution; and (iii) every agent aj

starts at sj and ends at gj .The quality of a solution is commonly evaluated by cost functions such as the makespan Cmax = max mj=1 Tj , where 

Tj is the arrival time of agent aj at gj , or the flowtime CΣ =Pmj=1 Tj . In this work, we adopt flowtime as the primary metric for evaluating solution quality. 

B. Review of CTS-PIBT 

CTS-PIBT was proposed as a baseline framework for the CTS-MAPF problem, combining task sequencing with a lightweight MAPF solver. It follows a hierarchical struc-ture consisting of two main components: generating task sequences for agents, and conducting low-level path finding following each task sequence with an extended version of PIBT. This design leverages the efficiency of PIBT-based planning while maintaining the ability to explore multiple task sequences, enabling the algorithm to achieve high suc-cess rates and scalability in large-scale scenarios. At the path-planning level, CTS-PIBT uses Extended-PIBT to generate collision-free joint paths. Extended-PIBT follows the stepwise PIBT paradigm: at each discrete timestep t, it maintains a configuration Qt = ( v1, . . . , v m) of all agent positions, and each agent selects its next vertex from adjacent vertices (or waits in place). Agents are processed in priority order with priority inheritance: if an agent requests a vertex occupied by another agent, the occupying agent is planned first via recursive backtracking, which helps resolve tight local conflicts. When no valid move exists, the agent waits. The procedure is summarized in Algorithm 1. With task-aware priority design and modified termination conditions, Extended-PIBT extends PIBT to meet CTS-MAPF requirements and, together with the task-sequencing layer, forms a lightweight framework that integrates task sequencing with online collision avoidance. By design, CTS-PIBT is a lightweight centralized frame-work that scales well to large-scale agents and can generate feasible solutions in real time. Its step-by-step, configuration-based procedure enables agents to coordinate locally at each timestep, which often resolves conflicts efficiently in practice. Nevertheless, PIBT is neither optimal nor complete; consequently, CTS-PIBT may fail to recover once local conflicts escalate into deadlocks or livelocks. For example, in Fig. 1(a), agent a1 is assigned a higher priority because it Algorithm 1: Extended-PIBT Step 

Input: Current config Qf , agents A, priorities P

Output: Next config Qt 

> 1

Qt ← each element initialized as ⊥ ; 

> 2

Sort agents in descending order of P ; 

> 3

for ai ∈ A do  

> 4

if Qt[i] = ⊥ then funcExPIBT (Qf , Q t, i ); 

> 5

return Qt ; 

> 6

function funcExPIBT( Qf , Qt, i): 

> 7

C ← neigh (Qf [i]) ∪ { Qf [i]} ; 

> 8

vnext ← next unvisited task location or goal of ai ; 

> 9

Sort C in ascending order of distance to vnext ; 

> 10

for v ∈ C do  

> 11

if hasConflict (Qt, i, v ) then continue ; 

> 12

Qt[i] ← v ; 

> 13

if ∃aj̸ = ai s.t. Qf [j] = v ∧ Qt[j] = ⊥ then  

> 14

if funcExPIBT( Qf , Q t, j ) = invalid 

then continue ; 

> 15

return valid  

> 16

Qt[i] ← Qf [i]; return invalid is farther from its final goal and thus attempts to move left to execute task vt1. However, agent a2 has no feasible position to yield; it returns invalid for this request and stays in place. Consequently, a1 falls back to its second-best action and also waits (since staying is closer to vt1 than moving up, down, or right), leaving both agents stationary and resulting in a dead-lock. In Fig. 1(b), agents a1 and a2 temporarily occupy each other’s goal locations. If a2 has higher priority, it reaches its goal while forcing a1 downward. In the next step, priorities swap, causing a1 to move upward and push a2 leftward. This priority alternation repeats, leading to persistent oscillation and a livelock. Moreover, the greedy task scheduling strategy in CTS-PIBT has only a limited effect on improving global solution quality. To address these issues, this work introduces two key enhancements: (i) a lock-agent detection module that identifies agents trapped in deadlock/livelock patterns and triggers a localized re-planning procedure based on LaCAM, thereby improving robustness and completeness; and (ii) a new anytime framework that incorporates an LNS-based refinement after each planning phase, enabling continuous improvement of solution quality over time.         

> Fig. 1: Examples of deadlock and livelock cases in CTS-PIBT. (a) Deadlock: agent a1attempts to execute task vt1, but agent a2has no alternative position to yield, blocking the move. (b) Livelock: agents a1and a2
> repeatedly oscillate around each other’s goals, preventing convergence.

III. M ETHOD 

In this section, we first present the overall process of our CTS-PLL (Enhanced CTS-PIBT with LaCAM and LNS) algorithm. We then provide detailed descriptions of its two core components: the lock detection and release module, and the LNS-based quality improvement module. 

A. CTS-PLL Algorithm 

CTS-PLL follows the same hierarchical structure as CTS-PIBT, consisting of joint task sequencing and low-level path finding. Building upon this framework, CTS-PLL further introduces dedicated mechanisms to improve robustness and continuously enhance solution quality. As shown in Fig. 2, CTS-PLL first generates the top-K

joint task sequences using the bi-level procedure proposed in [20]. For each candidate sequence, it runs Extended-PIBT augmented with a lock-detection module. If Extended-PIBT fails to produce a valid solution within a predefined step limit, lock detection is triggered to identify stagnated agents. The algorithm then invokes LaCAM for localized MAPF problem to escape from the lock, which will be introduced in Sec III-B In addition, CTS-PLL incorporates an anytime refinement procedure to improve path quality. For each task sequence under consideration, the planner first generates collision-free joint paths and then applies LNS with a fixed budget (either a preset number of iterations or a time limit) to refine the solution. It subsequently moves on to the next task sequence and repeats the same refinement process. In each LNS iteration, a subset of agent paths is destroyed and re-optimized, enabling the solution to be gradually improved (e.g., toward lower flowtime). The refinement terminates once the budget is exhausted. As a result, CTS-PLL can quickly output feasible solutions and, when additional time is available, progressively improve them. 

> Fig. 2: The main process of CTS-PLL, which has four key components: joint task sequencing, path finding using Extended-PIBT, lock detection and release module and solution quality enhancement via LNS.

Formally, the overall workflow of CTS-PLL is summa-rized in Algorithm 2. The algorithm first initializes the sequence index i = 1 and sets the current best solution 

Π∗ to None . Then, within the time limit Tmax , it iteratively explores candidate joint task sequences. At each iteration, CTS-PLL queries KBestJointSequencing with K = i to obtain the current best task sequence T ∗ 

> i

, and computes a corresponding joint plan Πi by running ExtendedPIBT . If the returned plan Πi is infeasible, the planner repeatedly Algorithm 2: CTS-PLL Algorithm 

Input: Graph G, agents A, starts S, goals G, tasks 

Vt, time limit Tmax 

Output: Joint Paths Π∗ 

> 1

i = 1 ; best solution Π∗ ← None;  

> 2

while t < T max do  

> 3

T ∗ 

> i

← KBestJointSequencing (K = i); 

> 4

Πi ← ExtendedP IBT (T ∗ 

> i

); 

> 5

while Πi is not feasible do  

> 6

updated Πi ← LockDetect &Release and resume ExtendedP IBT ; 

> 7

Π′ 

> i

← refine Πi by LNS;  

> 8

if cost (Π ′

> i

) < cost (Π ∗) or Π∗ is None then  

> 9

update Π∗ ← Π′

> i

; 

> 10

i = i + 1 ; 

> 11

return Π∗ ;

Algorithm 3: LockDetect&Release 

Input: Infeasible path Π, goals G, tasks Vt

Output: Updated incomplete path Π′ 

> 1

Alock ← DetectLock (Π , G); 

> 2

ˆt ← F indLockT ime (Π , Alock , G, V t); 

> 3

eQˆt ← configuration of Alock at ˆt; 

> 4

for ai ∈ A lock do  

> 5

eQtarget [i] ← define the target vertex of ai; 

> 6

eΠ ← LaCAM ( eQˆt, eQtarget , Alock ); 

> 7

Π′ ← use eΠ to update Π; 

> 8

return Π′;triggers the LockDetect&Release procedure to update Πi and resumes ExtendedPIBT until a feasible solution is obtained. Once feasibility is achieved, CTS-PLL applies an LNS-based refinement to Πi, producing an improved plan Π′

> i

. The Π∗

is updated whenever Π′ 

> i

has a lower cost than the current best (or when Π∗ is None ). The process continues with subsequent task sequences until the time budget is exhausted, and the algorithm finally returns the lowest-cost solution Π∗

found within Tmax .

B. Lock Agents Detection and Release 

As discussed above, the purpose of the lock agents de-tection and release stage is to help agents escape from lock states. Therefore, as shown in Line 6 of Algorithm 2, this stage outputs an updated joint path Π′. Note that Π′ is not a complete CTS-MAPF solution; it only resolves the lock by releasing the stagnated agents. The planner must subsequently resume Extended-PIBT to obtain a full joint path for the CTS-MAPF problem. The procedure of lock detection and release is shown in Algorithm 3. 

1) Lock Agents Detection and Time Localization: The lock detection mechanism is triggered whenever Extended-PIBT returns an infeasible joint path plan. It then identifies the lock-agent set Alock from this plan as follows (Line 1 in Algorithm 3): (i) all agents that have not yet completed assigned tasks and reached their final goals; and (ii) agents that have already reached their goals but occupy locations that block the motion of unfinished agents. This definition captures both active agents that are still executing tasks and passive agents that inadvertently cause stagnation. After identifying the lock-agent set Alock , we further determine the time at which the system enters the lock state (Line 2 in Algorithm 3). Specifically, for each agent 

ai ∈ A lock , we compute tlast  

> i

, the timestep when ai completes its most recently finished task in the (infeasible) joint path returned by Extended-PIBT. The lock time is then defined as: ˆt = min ai∈A lock tlast  

> i

. By taking the minimum, we locate the earliest moment at which progress among the lock agents may start to stall, so that a recovery procedure can be applied as early as possible. We denote the configuration of the lock agents at time ˆt as eQˆt (Line 3 in Algorithm 3), where the tilde indicates that the configuration only includes agents in 

Alock . The recovery module is then applied to eQˆt to resolve the lock. 

2) Lock Release via MAPF Solver with Completeness: 

After determining the lock-agent set Alock and the lock time 

ˆt, we release the stagnation by solving a local MAPF instance over the lock agents only. In this stage, agents outside Alock 

are frozen at their current vertices and treated as static obstacles, so the re-planning is confined to the congested region while leaving the remaining agents unaffected. Any complete MAPF solver can be used to compute a collision-free local path. In this work we adopt LaCAM. Lines 4–5 of Algorithm 3 construct the local MAPF in-stance. The initial configuration is eQˆt, and the key is to define the target configuration eQtarget . A straightforward choice is to set eQtarget [i] as the next task vertex in agent ai’s task sequence (or its final goal if all tasks have been completed), which helps agents escape while preserving the prescribed task order. However, we observe that this target configuration definition often leads to high computational overhead in practice: LaCAM may require a long time to succeed, likely because its configuration generator is also PIBT-based and must enumerate many candidate configurations when the system is already in a locked state. Therefore, in practical runs we instead construct eQtarget by randomly exchanging the positions of agents in Alock (i.e., applying a random permutation over eQˆt). This perturbation breaks common symmetries behind deadlocks/livelocks and redistributes agents away from heavily congested vertices, thereby creating new opportunities for subsequent plan-ning. While this target selection does not provide a formal completeness guarantee of lock release, it is empirically effective at resolving the majority of stagnation cases (See Section IV). Once LaCAM returns a local plan eΠ, we splice 

eΠ into the original infeasible plan Π to obtain an updated (here still incomplete) plan Π′, recompute agent priorities based on the new configuration, and resume Extended-PIBT to search for a feasible CTS-MAPF solution. C. Solution Quality Enhancement via LNS 

CTS-PIBT provides an anytime mechanism by enumerat-ing alternative joint task sequences and invoking Extended-PIBT to obtain a path plan for each sequence. However, this form of anytime improvement is sequence-only : it relies solely on switching to a different task sequence and does not actively optimize the path quality under a fixed sequence. Therefore, in CTS-PLL, after Extended-PIBT (with lock detection and release) returns a feasible joint plan for a considered sequence, we further apply Large Neighborhood Search to refine the plan cost. Given a feasible joint plan Π, LNS iteratively performs a destroy-repair cycle under a fixed budget (either a preset number of iterations or a time limit). In the destroy phase, we select a subset of agents and remove their paths from 

Π, while keeping the remaining paths fixed. Here, we em-ploy three complementary neighborhood-selection strategies: (i) Random : uniformly sample agents to maintain explo-ration diversity; (ii) Intersection-based : prioritize agents whose paths traverse congested (high-conflict) vertices; (iii) 

Random-walk : start from a delayed agent and follow con-flicts along its trajectory to construct a correlated neighbor-hood. To adaptively allocate search effort among these strategies, we maintain a non-negative weight ws for each strategy s.After applying strategy s once, we compute its local cost saving 

∆s = X

> π∈Π−
> s

C(π) − X

> π∈Π+
> s

C(π),

where Π− 

> s

denotes the set of paths removed (before re-planning) and Π+ 

> s

denotes the repaired paths produced for the same agents, and C(·) is the path cost. A positive ∆s

indicates that the repair reduces the cost on the affected subset. We then update the weight using an exponential moving average: 

ws ← (1 − γ)ws + γ max {∆s, 0},

where γ ∈ [0 , 1] controls the update rate. This rule rewards strategies that yield consistent improvements and gradually downplays those that rarely help. In the repair phase, the removed agents are re-planned sequentially using prioritized planning (PP), while the pre-served paths are treated as spatiotemporal obstacles to avoid both vertex and edge conflicts. If the repaired plan Π′ is feasible and improves the current best plan, we accept it; otherwise, we keep the current one. Since LNS can be terminated at any time budget, CTS-PLL inherits an any-time property: it can output a feasible solution quickly and progressively reduce the flowtime as refinement continues, which is particularly effective in congested settings. IV. E XPERIMENTS AND VALIDATION 

We conducted extensive experiments to evaluate the ef-fectiveness of CTS-PLL in both simulation and real-world                         

> TABLE I: Experimental settings for sparse and dense scenarios.
> Scenario type Maps Agents NTasks MInstances
> Sparse four maps 5,10 ,20 10 ,20 ,30 ,40 ,50 50 Dense maze 50 60 ,90 ,120 ,150 ,180 50

settings. The evaluation was performed under two represen-tative types of grid-based maps: sparse scenarios with rela-tively low agent density, and dense scenarios with frequent interactions and congestion. In each case, we compared CTS-PLL against baseline methods to assess its performance in terms of success rate, running time, and flowtime. Beyond simulation, we further validated the practicality of CTS-PLL on a set of physical mobile robots, demonstrating its applicability in real-world environments. 

A. Settings, Benchmark and Baselines 

All experiments were conducted on a computer equipped with an Intel Core i7-12700KF CPU and 32GB of RAM, running on a Linux system. The implementation of CTS-PLL was developed in C++, and all baseline methods were executed under the same environment to ensure fairness. For the benchmark maps, we used four standard grid scenarios from a CTS-MAPF dataset proposed in [1]: ran-dom , room , maze , and empty , as shown in Fig. 3. Sparse settings were created on all four maps, while dense settings were generated only on the maze map, since it is the most challenging scenario and most prone to agent conflicts. For every combination of agent and task numbers (N, M) under each setting, we generated 50 random instances with different start, goal, and task locations. The detailed experimental con-figurations, including the ranges of agent and task numbers for each setting, are summarized in Table I. To clearly distinguish the contributions of different com-ponents in our approach, we evaluate three variants of CTS-PLL in the experiments: 

CTS-PLL-v1 : Uses only the best task sequence and incorporates only the lock detection and release module on top of CTS-PIBT. 

CTS-PLL-v2 : An early-stop version that includes the lock detection and release module and searches through task sequences until a feasible solution is found, but does not include LNS optimization. 

CTS-PLL-v3 : The full anytime version that includes both lock detection and release and LNS modules. It continues the search and refinement until a preset time threshold, allowing continuous improvement of solution quality over time. In terms of baselines, for the sparse setting we compared CTS-PLL against three representative methods: CTS-CBS [1], CBSS [19], and CTS-PIBT [20]. In the dense setting, we only compared against CTS-PIBT, as the success rates of CTS-CBS and CBSS were too low to yield meaningful re-sults. For runtime limits, in the sparse setting both CTS-PLL-v3 and CTS-PIBT were given a limit of 60s, while CBSS and CTS-CBS were allowed up to 180s. In the dense setting, both CTS-PLL-v3 and CTS-PIBT-anytime were allocated 180s. 

B. Comparative Analysis in Sparse Scenes 

We first evaluate CTS-PLL in the sparse settings. The comparative results are summarized in Fig. 4, where perfor-Fig. 3: Benchmark maps adopted for evaluation, including four represen-tative scenarios: empty, random, room, and maze. These maps are used to construct sparse and dense experimental settings. 

mance is reported in terms of success rate, average runtime, and average solution quality (flowtime). In terms of success rate, both two versions of CTS-PLL demonstrate clear superiority, successfully solving all tested cases across maps and parameter scales in sparse scenes. Even in instances where CTS-PIBT failed due to unresolved deadlock or livelock, CTS-PLL-v2 and CTS-PLL-v3 consistently provided feasible solutions, confirming the effectiveness of the lock detection and recovery module. By contrast, search-based methods such as CTS-CBS and CBSS, despite being given a longer time limit of 180 s, still exhibited significantly lower success rates in more constrained maps. Regarding computational efficiency, CTS-PLL-v2 is able to complete all cases within a very short time, maintain-ing efficiency on par with CTS-PIBT while avoiding the exponential growth in runtime observed in search-based approaches. Moreover, the CTS-PLL-v3 was executed with a fixed 60 s budget, during which it continuously refined solutions to improve path quality, demonstrating both fast feasibility and the ability to enhance solution quality given additional time. As for solution quality, CTS-PLL-v2 already matches or slightly improves upon CTS-PIBT, while the anytime-enhanced version consistently achieves lower costs across all benchmark maps. The improvement is most evident in structured environments such as room and maze , where congestion is more likely to accumulate. Overall, the results in sparse scenarios highlight the strengths of CTS-PLL: it preserves the scalability and ef-ficiency of Extended-PIBT, guarantees 100% success rate by overcoming deadlock and livelock failures, and, with the anytime LNS refinement, further improves solution quality under identical runtime constraints. 

C. Denser Configuration Experiments 

To more clearly evaluate the contribution of each en-hancement module in CTS-PLL, we conduct ablation studies in denser configurations, where agent-agent interactions are much more frequent. Experiments are performed on the most complex scenario maze map with 50 agents and task numbers varying from 60 to 180. We only compare CTS-PLL variants against CTS-PIBT, as other baselines fail to solve most instances in these dense settings. First we compare CTS-PLL-v1 with CTS-PIBT in terms of success rate. They both only search feasible solution under the best task sequence, with CTS-PLL-v1 augmenting CTS-PIBT solely through the lock detection and release module. As shown in Table II, CTS-PLL-v1 consistently achieves                        

> TABLE II: Success rate results of denser configurations on maze map. Method Success Rate ↑
> # Tasks 60 90 120 150 180 CTS-PIBT 76% 68% 66% 50% 38% CTS-PLL-v1 98% 92% 96% 92% 72% Improvement Rate 28.95% 35.29% 45.45% 84.00% 89.47%
> Note: Success rate comparison between CTS-PIBT and CTS-PLL-v1 on the maze
> map with 50 agents. CTS-PLL-v1 incorporates only the lock detection and release module, demonstrating that this mechanism effectively resolves deadlock and livelock situations, leading to significantly higher success rates as task density increases.

higher success rates across all task counts, with improve-ments ranging from 28.95% to 89.47%. This confirms that the proposed lock detection and LaCAM-based recovery effectively resolve deadlocks and livelocks that frequently occur in dense settings, thereby substantially enhancing the robustness of the configuration-based planner.                       

> TABLE III: Solution quality results of denser configurations on maze map. Method Solution Quality (Flowtime) ↓
> # Tasks 60 90 120 150 180 CTS-PIBT-anytime 196.35 253.21 316.93 389.62 457.04 CTS-PLL-v3 162.00 221.89 301.85 357.99 451.34 Improvement Rate 17.49% 12.37% 4.76% 8.12% 1.25%
> Note: We compare CTS-PIBT-anytime and CTS-PLL-v3 in terms of average solution quality (flowtime). Results show that CTS-PLL-v3 consistently provides shorter flowtime solutions across all tested configurations.

We then compare the solution quality (flowtime) between CTS-PIBT-anytime and CTS-PLL-v3 in Table III. Both algo-rithms will search for feasible solutions throughout candidate task sequences until the time limit, while CTS-PLL-v3 inte-grates both lock recovery and LNS refinement. The results demonstrate that CTS-PLL-v3 yields shorter flowtimes, with improvements between 1.25% and 17.49%. This indicates that the LNS module effectively optimizes the paths after a feasible plan is obtained, leading to better overall efficiency. Together, these ablation results demonstrate the distinct yet synergistic contributions of the two proposed modules: the lock detect and release module ensures high success rates in challenging dense scenarios, while the anytime LNS refinement progressively improves the solution quality. The combined approach in CTS-PLL provides comprehensive improvements in both feasibility and efficiency for dense CTS-MAPF environments. 

D. Practical Robot Tests 

In this section, we conducted physical robot experiments to evaluate the CTS-PLL algorithm. The experimental setup employed toio robots, which maintained Bluetooth communi-cation with a central controller and navigated on a designated mat by following continuous coordinate commands. Fig. 5 presents snapshots from one representative run of the physical robot experiments. Fig. 5(a) shows the initial configuration of the robots, while Fig. 5(f) depicts the final state after all tasks are completed. During the early stages (Fig. 5(b) and 5(c)), the robots follow the planning of Extended-PIBT. Specifically, agent a0 and agent a2 si-multaneously attempt to move into each other’s positions, empty-32-32    

> random-32-32-10
> room-32-32-4
> maze-32-32-4
> Configuration Success R ate Average R untime(s) Average Solution Quality

Fig. 4: Performance of CTS-PLL and baseline methods under different difficulty levels (map types, agent numbers, and task numbers). For clarity, we omit the x-axis labels in each subfigure since they share the same contents. The x-axis represents the pairs of (N,M) (agent number, task number), ranging from (5,10) to (5,50), (10,10) to (10,50), and (20,10) to (20,50). Here, CTS-PLL-v2 denotes the variant without anytime optimization, while CTS-PLL-v3 refers to the full method with anytime mechanism and LNS refinement. 

resulting in an edge conflict. Since a0 holds higher priority, it occupies the desired vertex while forcing a2 to adjust downward, thereby resolving the conflict locally. However, as illustrated in Fig. 5(d), a livelock situation occurs when agent a0 and agent a1 oscillate at each other’s goal positions due to priority-based planning, which Extended-PIBT alone cannot resolve. At this point, CTS-PLL detects the livelock and invokes the LaCAM-based local re-planning module. As shown in Fig. 5(e), the two agents are guided to a nearby region with connectivity degree three, where they successfully exchange positions. This recovery enables all agents to eventually complete their assigned tasks and reach their respective goals, as seen in Fig. 5(f). These results demonstrate that CTS-PLL can effectively detect and resolve livelock situations, validating its robustness in real-world experiments. V. C ONCLUSIONS 

This paper presented CTS-PLL, an enhanced frame-work for solving the CTS-MAPF problem by integrating configuration-based search with mechanisms for robustness and solution refinement. Through the combination of lock de-tection with LaCAM-based local re-planning, the algorithm effectively overcomes failure cases that limit CTS-PIBT. The inclusion of an anytime LNS refinement further improves path quality, particularly in dense and congested settings. Experimental results across diverse benchmarks confirm that CTS-PLL consistently outperforms prior approaches in both feasibility and efficiency. In the sparse setting, CTS-PLL achieves 100% success, far surpassing CBSS and CTS-CBS, and improves solution quality by an average of 10.4% over CTS-PIBT. In the dense scenario, two sets of ablation exper-iments effectively demonstrated the feasibility and efficiency improvement of CTS-PLL compared to CTS-PIBT. Physical robot tests further demonstrated the method’s applicability under real-world conditions. Future work will explore scaling the framework to larger agent-task systems, incorporating learning-based heuristics to accelerate decision-making, and extending the approach to dynamic or uncertain environ-ments. REFERENCES [1] J. Jiang, R. Li, et al. , “Cts-cbs: A new approach for multi-agent col-laborative task sequencing and path finding,” 2025, arXiv:2503.20324. [2] P. R. Wurman, R. D’Andrea, and M. Mountz, “Coordinating hundreds of cooperative, autonomous vehicles in warehouses,” AI Magazine ,vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 9–20, 2008. [3] J. Salvado, R. Krug, M. Mansouri, and F. Pecora, “Motion planning and goal assignment for robot fleets using trajectory optimization,” in 

Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics and Automation (ICRA) . IEEE, 2022, pp. 8987–8993. [4] Y. Dai, D. Kim, and K. Lee, “Development of a fleet management system for multiple robots’ task allocation using deep reinforcement learning,” Processes , vol. 12, no. 2, p. 266, 2024. [5] G. Xu, X. Kang, H. Yang, Y. Wu, W. Liu, J. Cao, and Y. Liu, “Distributed multi-vehicle task assignment and motion planning in dense environments,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems , vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 3450–3463, 2023. [6] G. Sharon, R. Stern, et al. , “Conflict-based search for optimal multi-agent pathfinding,” Artificial intelligence , vol. 219, pp. 40–66, 2015. [7] E. Boyarski, A. Felner, et al. , “Icbs: The improved conflict-based search algorithm for multi-agent pathfinding,” in Proceedings of the International Symposium on Combinatorial Search , vol. 6, no. 1, 2015, pp. 223–225. Fig. 5: Physical robot experiment using toio robots to validate CTS-PLL. Robots are shown as purple, cyan, and yellow squares. The corresponding colored stars indicate their goal locations, while red triangles represent task points. Black numbers above each task denote the robots assigned to it, and red numbers below show the robots that have already completed it. The top subfigure illustrates the real-world robot experiment, while the bottom subfigure shows the corresponding simulation process. The figure depicts the trajectories of the robots during the experiment. [8] M. Barer, G. Sharon, et al. , “Suboptimal variants of the conflict-based search algorithm for the multi-agent pathfinding problem,” in 

Proceedings of the international symposium on combinatorial Search ,vol. 5, no. 1, 2014, pp. 19–27. [9] J. Li, W. Ruml, and S. Koenig, “Eecbs: A bounded-suboptimal search for multi-agent path finding,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , vol. 35, no. 14. AAAI Press, 2021, pp. 12 353–12 362. [10] M. Erdmann and T. Lozano-P´ erez, “On multiple moving objects,” in 

Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics and Automation (ICRA) . IEEE, 1987, pp. 1419–1424. [11] D. Sun, A. Kleiner, and B. Nebel, “Behavior-based multi-robot col-lision avoidance,” in 2014 IEEE international conference on robotics and automation (ICRA) . IEEE, 2014, pp. 1668–1673. [12] G. Sartoretti, J. Kerr, et al. , “Primal: Pathfinding via reinforcement and imitation multi-agent learning,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 2378–2385, 2019. [13] Y. Yang, M. Fan, et al. , “Attention-based priority learning for limited time multi-agent path finding,” in Proceedings of the 23rd Interna-tional Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems ,2024, pp. 1993–2001. [14] K. Okumura, M. Machida, et al. , “Priority inheritance with backtrack-ing for iterative multi-agent path finding,” Artificial Intelligence , vol. 310, p. 103752, 2022. [15] K. Okumura, “Lacam: Search-based algorithm for quick multi-agent pathfinding,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , vol. 37, no. 10, 2023, pp. 11 655–11 662. [16] J. Li, Z. Chen, et al. , “Anytime multi-agent path finding via large neighborhood search,” in International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence 2021 . Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), 2021, pp. 4127–4135. [17] H. Jiang, Y. Zhang, et al. , “Scaling lifelong multi-agent path finding to more realistic settings: Research challenges and opportunities,” in 

Proceedings of the International Symposium on Combinatorial Search ,vol. 17, 2024, pp. 234–242. [18] K. Okumura, “Engineering lacam*: Towards real-time, large-scale, and near-optimal multi-agent pathfinding,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems (AAMAS) . IFAAMAS, 2024, pp. 1501–1509. [19] Z. Ren, S. Rathinam, and H. Choset, “Cbss: A new approach for multi-agent combinatorial path finding,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics ,vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 2669–2683, 2023. [20] J. Jiang, Y. Yang, R. Li, Y. Xu, S. Xu, and J. Wang, “Cts-pibt: An efficient method for multi-agent collaborative task sequencing and path finding,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , pp. 1–8, 2025. [21] P. Surynek, “Multi-goal multi-agent path finding via decoupled and integrated goal vertex ordering,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artificial Intel-ligence , vol. 35, no. 14. AAAI Press, 2021, pp. 12 409–12 417. [22] A. Camisa, A. Testa, and G. Notarstefano, “Multi-robot pickup and delivery via distributed resource allocation,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics , vol. 39, no. 2, pp. 1106–1118, 2022. [23] Q. Xu, J. Li, et al. , “Multi-goal multi-agent pickup and delivery,” in 

2022 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) . IEEE, 2022, pp. 9964–9971. [24] W. H¨ onig, S. Kiesel, et al. , “Conflict-based search with optimal task assignment,” in Proceedings of the International Joint Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems , 2018.